--- 2019J6_Rippon_IECR.pdf ---
Page 1:
Machine Direction Adaptive Control on a
Paper Machine
Lee D. Rippon, вҲ—,вҖ  Qiugang Lu, вҖ  Michael G. Forbes, вҖЎ R. Bhushan Gopaluni, вҲ—,вҖ 
Philip D. Loewen, В¶ and Johan U. BackstrГ¶m вҖЎ
вҖ Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, The University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, BC, Canada.
вҖЎHoneywell Process Solutions, 500 Brooksbank Ave, North Vancouver, BC, Canada.
В¶Department of Mathematics, The University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC,
Canada.
E-mail: leeripp@chbe.ubc.ca; bhushan.gopaluni@ubc.ca
Abstract
Control of industrial sheet and п¬Ғlm processes involves separate controllers and ac-
tuators for minimizing both temporal variations along the machine direction (MD) and
spatial variations along the cross direction (CD). Model-based control methods such
as model predictive control (MPC) have gained widespread implementation for con-
trolling both the MD and CD processes. One limitation of model-based methods is
that changes in the true process pose signiп¬Ғcant identiп¬Ғcation challenges for operators
which are often resolved with costly open loop identiп¬Ғcation experiments. The pre-
dominant industrial measurement technology acquires a signal of mixed MD and CD
variations that requires separation. This work compares various model-free approaches
for MD-CD separation as a prerequisite to eп¬Җective MD control. To address the chal-
lenges of model-based control this paper introduces an adaptive control method for the
1
Page 2:
MD process. Closed loop identiп¬Ғcation experiments are conducted and compared to
benchmarks on an industrial paper machine simulator.
Keywords: papermaking, model-based control, model-plant mismatch detection, input
design, system identiп¬Ғcation, adaptive control
Introduction
Improved sheet, web and п¬Ғlm property estimation is motivated by the ongoing desire for
higher quality, more consistent products and the constant desire for maximum production
eп¬ғciency. Collectively, sheet and п¬Ғlm processes such as paper making, metal rolling, coating
and polymer п¬Ғlm extrusion constitute a vast global market. As such, improving the opera-
tional eп¬ғciency and control of sheet and п¬Ғlm processes is of signiп¬Ғcant industrial importance.
Sheet and п¬Ғlm processes are similar in that property variations are minimized along both
the length and the width of the sheet, also known as the machine direction (MD) and the
cross direction (CD), respectively1. Moreover, outputs are often measured by a scanning
sensor that traverses the moving sheet and samples a mixture of MD and CD variation.2,3
To consider the practical industrial complexities, this work focuses on an application with
a paper machine. It is important to note that this work is relevant to all sheet and п¬Ғlm
processes involving a scanning sensor and a model-based control system.
A Fourdrinier paper machine, as shown in Figure 1, consists of a series of dewatering
and pressing operations that transform a slurry of pulp п¬Ғber into a uniform sheet of paper.
These complex and expensive machines can be over 100 m long in the MD and produce a
sheet of paper over 10 m wide at rates exceeding 30 m/s.4 In the forming section the pulp
п¬Ғber п¬Ӯows from the thick stock pump to the headbox where it is diluted and sprayed through
a slice lip onto a moving wire or felt. In the pressing and drying sections the wet sheet of
п¬Ғber is compressed and dried by passing through a series of metal rollers, some of which are
heated with high pressure steam. Finally, the sheet is smoothed into a п¬Ғnal product before
2
Page 3:
collecting on a reel at the end of the machine.5
Cross direction
Scanning sensors
Machine direction
Forming Pressing Drying Calendaring
Figure 1: Schematic of a Fourdrinier paper machine (adapted with permission from6)
The objective in paper-making, from a quality control perspective, is to eп¬ғciently pro-
duce a uniform sheet of paper with consistent properties that match customer speciп¬Ғcations.
Dedicated MD and CD control systems are used to address temporal and spatial variations,
respectively. To minimize temporal variations MD actuators (e.g., thick stock valve posi-
tioning and dryer steam pressure) are used as they have a relatively uniform eп¬Җect on the
spatial properties of the sheet.7 Spatial variations are minimized by manipulating spatially
distributed CD actuators such as headbox dilution valves and induction proп¬Ғlers.8
To implement feedback control the MD and CD controllers require measured output
proп¬Ғles which are typically acquired using a scanning sensor. Due to the diagonal sampling
trajectory the resulting signal acquired by the scanner contains a mixture of MD and CD
property variations. From this signal, separate MD trends and CD proп¬Ғles need to be
determined and provided to the MD and CD control systems, respectively. The process of
generating these separate controller inputs is referred to as MD-CD separation. One of the
more challenging aspects of MD-CD separation that has yet to be suп¬ғciently addressed is
the presence of MD variations aliasing into the CD proп¬Ғle, i.e., MD aliasing. The procedure
of MD-CD separation is a prerequisite not only for model-based feedback control, but also
for performance monitoring and system identiп¬Ғcation. The use of MPC for MD control has
become increasingly popular since it was introduced by Honeywell in 1994.9 Maintaining an
accurate model of the process while the true plant changes according to the varying operating
3
Page 4:
conditions and physical characteristics is a problem of signiп¬Ғcant industrial interest.
This paper addresses two fundamental challenges of sheet and п¬Ғlm process control with
a traversing scanning sensor. Firstly, the MD-CD separation problem is introduced and a
literature review is conducted to assess previous eп¬Җorts. A set of model-free MD-CD sep-
aration techniques are selected for comparative analysis due to their practical appeal and
п¬Ӯexibility. A novel technique based on compressive sensing (CS) is developed for implemen-
tation with a scanning sensor and a study with multiple scanners is presented. The results of
the MD-CD separation have a direct impact on the second fundamental challenge addressed
here, i.e., adapting the MD process model used by the MD MPC control system. Novel
developments towards process monitoring (PM), input design (ID) and system identiп¬Ғcation
(SI) are uniп¬Ғed into an adaptive control framework. Integrated case studies are conducted
to demonstrate the eп¬Җectiveness of the uniп¬Ғed adaptive control algorithm and compare with
alternative identiп¬Ғcation techniques.
MD-CD separation
The comparative study of MD-CD separation methods conducted in this work centers around
the problem of MD aliasing. As such, this section begins with some background material
to introduce the practical industrial constraints. Afterwards, the п¬Ғndings of a thorough
literature review on MD-CD separation methods is presented which motivates the selection
of the candidate model-free methods for comparative analysis. These techniques, namely
exponential п¬Ғltering (EF), power spectral analysis (PSA) and CS, are introduced in greater
detail with CS in particular being developed for implementation with a scanning sensor. The
results of the comparative analysis are presented and a novel study into CS with multiple
scanners is provided. Commentary on the relevance and importance of accurate MD-CD
separation for adaptive MD control is provided before introducing the proposed adaptive
control framework.
4
Page 5:
Background
Scanning sensors were п¬Ғrst introduced around 1980 when they began to replace the single-
point sensors which had a п¬Ғxed CD position.10 The scanning sensor framework (as shown in
Figure 2 below) consists of a scanner head mounted on a frame that spans the width of the
sheet. The scanner head is п¬Ғlled with a variety of sensors that can measure sheet properties
such as basis weight, moisture content, and caliper (i.e., thickness).11,12 Some paper machines
use scanning sensors at diп¬Җerent locations as in Figure 1. One approach to address MD-
CD separation is to use an array of stationary sensors that span the width of the sheet.
However the cost of such a sensor array is generally prohibitive due to the expensive sensor
technology.13 Until sheet spanning sensing mechanisms become commonplace in industry,
the problem of MD-CD separation with a scanning sensor conп¬Ғguration remains relevant.14
MD
CD
Пҙ
vsheet
vscan
Sampling 
Trajectory
Scanner 
Frame
Scanner 
Head
Figure 2: Schematic of a scanning sensor
The resulting sampling trajectory is described by the dotted red line in Figure 2 although
in reality, the angleОё from the sampling trajectory to the MD axis is much smaller, typically
Оё вүҲ 1В°. Speciп¬Ғcally, Оё can be roughly calculated as follows:15
Оё = 90 вҲ’arctan(vsheet
tscan
wsheet
), (1)
where tscan is the the time required for a single traverse of the sheet,vsheet is the MD speed
of the sheet andwsheet is the width of the sheet. It is worth noting that equation 1 ignores
occasional stationary periods for sensor calibration and assumes a constant scan speed.
5
Page 6:
The acquired scanner signal,y вҲҲ Rm, needs to be processed such that it represents the
two dimensional reality of the process, i.e.,Y вҲҲ RnBГ—nS. Here m is equal to the number
of measurements taken by the scanning sensor,nB is the number of evenly spaced CD bins
and nS is equal to the number of MD scans. Each time the scanner traverses the moving
sheet of paper is considered one scan, during which up to 10,000 locations along the CD
proп¬Ғle can be sampled.2 These measurements are down-sampled into evenly spaced CD bins
at a lower common resolution (e.g., 500 bins) that is more computationally tractable for the
model-based control systems.16 To achieveRm вҶҰвҶ’ RnBГ—nS the measurements of each scan are
collapsed into a column vector as shown by matrixY in Table 1.
Table 1: Two-dimensional representation of scanner signal
Scans вҶҗ MD вҶ’
Scan 1 В· В· В· Scan j В· В· В· Scan nS
Bins Bin 1 Yпңұ,пңұ В· В· В· Yпңұ,j В· В· В· Yпңұ,nS
... ... ... ... ... ...
вҶ‘ Bin i Yi,пңұ В· В· В· Yi,j В· В· В· Yi,nS
CD ... ... ... ... ... ...
вҶ“ Bin nB YnB,пңұ В· В· В· YnB,j В· В· В· YnB,nS
The sheet property matrixY can be decomposed as follows:
Y = ВҜYMD + ВҜYCD + YR, (2)
where ВҜYMD, ВҜYCD and YR represent data associated with MD variations, CD variations and
residual variations, respectively.17 More speciп¬Ғcally, if the average of all data points across
scan j is
ВҜY MD
j = 1
nB
nBвҲ‘
i=пңұ
Yi,j (3)
then
ВҜYMD = q
[
ВҜY MD
пңұ В· В· В· ВҜY MD
nS
]
, (4)
where q is a column vector of lengthnB п¬Ғlled with all ones. In other words, the values along
6
Page 7:
the rows of a speciп¬Ғc column ofВҜYMD are п¬Ғxed to the scan average and the matrix has a п¬Ӯat
CD proп¬Ғle. Therefore, when Y вҲ’ ВҜYMD is computed it is equivalent to removing the scan
average from every data point along that particular scan, i.e., removing the MD variations.
The deп¬Ғnition of ВҜYCD follows analogously with values along a particular row being п¬Ғxed as
the average over all scans resulting in a п¬Ӯat MD proп¬Ғle.
This treatment of scanner data ignores the geometry of the sampling trajectory. While
the rows correctly represent the approximate spatial positioning of each measurement, the
columns treat the temporal positioning of each measurement during a scan as if the sheet
was stationary. For control purposes the MD trend is often determined by simply taking the
average of each scan and ignoring the MD variations observed within the scan.8 Subsequent
scans are averaged or temporal п¬Ғltering is applied to obtain the CD control proп¬Ғle. Ignoring
the intra-scan MD position signiп¬Ғcantly limits the resolution of the MD trend and thus limits
the information provided to the MD controller as well as any MD performance monitoring
andsystemidentiп¬Ғcationalgorithms. Alternatively, theproposedMD-CDseparationmethod
uses CS to incorporate a priori knowledge of the sampling geometry to generate a more
informative MD trend. Speciп¬Ғcally, the CS method accounts for both the MD and CD
positions of each measurement to eп¬Җectively reconstruct a high resolution sheet estimate.
The increased resolution of the MD trend provides direct beneп¬Ғts to the adaptive control
framework with regards to early upset detection, improved performance monitoring and
additional data for better system identiп¬Ғcation.
To show the eп¬Җects of MD aliasing the following simplifying assumptions are made:
Assumption 1.The scanner traverses the moving sheet at a constant and equivalent speed
in both directions.
Assumption 2.The scanner reverses exactly at the edges of the sheet.
Assumption 3.The CD proп¬Ғle is independent of time.
Although variable rate scanning has drawn recent interest it is still common in many ap-
plications for Assumption 1 to be true for extended periods of time. Ignoring occasional
7
Page 8:
calibration periods the scanner trajectory is reasonably approximated by Assumption 2.
While Assumption 3 is not technically correct, it is true for the vast majority of CD vari-
ability over short periods of time.18 Controllable MD and CD frequencies can be determined
to establish a lower bound on the required resolution for MD-CD separation methods. The
highest cutoп¬Җ frequency for MD control loops is for the headbox total head at around 0.05
Hz. 19 The CD actuators may have up to 300 individual actuators and the actuator spacing
(for a slice lip system) is from 7.0 cm to 20 cm with a bandwidth of around 15 cm.9,20
According to the assumptions described above, the raw scanner data forms an even,
periodic function with respect to the CD variations. Each time the scanner completes two
scans back and forth across the sheet represents one period, i.e., (2tscan). If one were to take
the Fourier transform of the scanner signal time series, the CD variations would contribute
to coeп¬ғcients at integer multiples of (2tscan)вҲ’1. Consequently, aliasing of MD variations in
the CD proп¬Ғle is most severe when the frequency of the MD variations occur at integer
multiples of (2tscan)вҲ’1. 21 The eп¬Җect of MD aliasing is apparent in Figure 3 by comparing the
true CD proп¬Ғle (green) to the observed proп¬Ғle (red). By attempting to mitigate п¬Ғctitious
CD variations the CD control system could introduce new disturbances to the detriment of
product quality. In some cases, averaging or temporal п¬Ғltering can successfully reduce the
eп¬Җect of MD aliasing, however this compromises proп¬Ғle resolution and controller response.14
Methods for MD-CD separation
Early developments in MD-CD separation focus on modeling the process outputs such as
basis weight and moisture. A nonlinear MD moisture model was proposed in 1986 and a
dual Kalman п¬Ғlter was introduced in 1988.3,22 In 1993 the moisture model was extended to
the CD and consolidated with a basis weight model before testing with both simulated and
industrial data.5,7,8 Although the tests presented are encouraging, these model-based MD-
CD separation methods have not gained widespread industrial implementation. This is likely
8
Page 9:
Figure 3: Four scans with MD variation at frequency 1/(2tscan)
because model based methods rely on speciп¬Ғcation of parameters that are machine speciп¬Ғc,
vary with operating conditions and must meet restrictive constraints to ensure convergence.
Subsequent work in MD-CD separation introduces wavelet basis functions to successfully
compress industrial data.23 Early eп¬Җorts failed to recognize the geometry of the scanner
but in 2004 a technique was developed that considers the sampling geometry and applies
the generalized sampling theorem to reconstruct MD and CD proп¬Ғles. However, a non-
causal п¬Ғlter is required that depends on the use of both past and future data.1 A causal
approximation of the non-causal п¬Ғlter is proposed and combined with recursive wavelet
denoising to estimate MD and CD proп¬Ғles but the problem of MD aliasing is not addressed.4
In 2005 explicit attention is provided to MD aliasing.21 Similarly, in 2008 a discrete cosine
transform (DCT) technique uses the fact that CD variations form an even periodic function
in the time domain as a means to conduct MD-CD separation. This technique is compared to
wavelet and EF methods where it is shown through simulations to have better performance.24
Unfortunately this DCT technique does not distinguish between MD and CD variations that
occur at integer multiples of (2tscan)-1 and thus does not address severe MD aliasing.
Recent attempts to address MD aliasing have explored the use of variable speed scanning
to minimize the impact of MD variations leaking into the CD proп¬Ғle. It is shown that if
9
Page 10:
the CD proп¬Ғle does not have any fast variations the support of the MD frequency compo-
nents shift if the scan speed shifts.11 In 2011 PSA with a fast Fourier transform (FFT) is
introduced to improve variance partitioning.25 A formal procedure for using PSA with two
diп¬Җerent scan speeds for MD-CD separation was patented by ABB in 2012.26 The beneп¬Ғts
of variable speed scanning for observing a spectral frequency shift in the MD components
are conп¬Ғrmed by researchers with Metso.14 In 2011 the concept of using CS for MD-CD sep-
aration was introduced with promising initial results but implementation with the practical
constraints of a scanning sensor was not considered.27 This work extends the CS technique
for implementation with a traversing scanning sensor and provides a comparative analysis
with the PSA method and the longstanding industrially dominant EF method.
Exponential п¬Ғltering
InEFtheaverageofeachscanisstoredinavector, ВҜY MD, togenerateatrendofmeasurements
for the MD control system. The CD proп¬Ғle is calculated as a weighted average of current
and past values across each CD bin by passing through an exponential п¬Ғlter, i.e.,
Y CD,f
i,j = Оұ(Yi,j вҲ’ ВҜY MD
j ) + (1 вҲ’ Оұ)Y CD,f
i,jвҲ’пңұ. (5)
Here, Y CD,f
i,j is the п¬Ғltered value for CD position i and MD position j. For EF the scan
average is subtracted from the measured value at each CD bin position and multiplied by
the п¬Ғlter factor, Оұ вҲҲ [0,1] which typically has a nominal value of 0.33.4,15 The eп¬Җect of EF
with Оұ = 0.33 is compared at the second, fortieth and eightieth scans as shown in Figure 4.
By the eightieth scan the п¬Ғltered proп¬Ғle is signiп¬Ғcantly less biased.
Power spectral analysis
By comparing the FFT of two consecutive scans at alternating scan speeds and observing the
shift in the support of the spectral contents, dominant MD frequencies can be distinguished
10
Page 11:
Figure 4: Exponential п¬Ғltering after 2, 40 and 80 scans
from dominant CD frequencies.26 To demonstrate the use of PSA for MD-CD separation,
consider scanning a sheet of paper with a single dominant MD frequency and a single dom-
inant CD frequency at alternating speeds. The top proп¬Ғle in Figure 5 shows the magnitude
of the spectral content with respect to the spatial frequency whereas the bottom proп¬Ғle
shows this spectral content plotted with respect to the temporal frequency. In the top plot
Figure 5: Spectral content of scans at diп¬Җerent scan speeds
the dominant frequencies along each scan align at the frequency of the CD variation (0.5
11
Page 12:
mвҲ’1) whereas in the bottom plot they align at the frequency of the MD variation (0.1 Hz).
This shift in the spectral content provides the basis for which MD-CD separation can be
conducted with PSA as described in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1Power spectral analysis for MD-CD separation
Input: Two consecutive scansyпңұ, yпңІ at alternating scans speeds.
Output: MD trends yMD
пңұ , yMD
пңІ and CD proп¬ҒlesyCD
пңұ , yCD
пңІ
for each scando
Take x = FFT(y) and |x|
Set a threshold asTпңұ = cпңұ В·mean(|x|) and set values of|x| вүӨ Tпңұ to zero
Find support of remaining nonzero coeп¬ғcients
Create separate spatial and temporal frequency supports
end for
for spatial and temporal frequency supportsdo
Find and store supports on consecutive scans that intersect
Set values ofx below noise threshold (TпңІ = cпңІ В·mean(|x|)) to zero
Set values ofx at intersecting supports to zero
Reconstruct yMD = IFFT(x) if intersecting spatial supports were removed
Reconstruct yCD = IFFT(x) if intersecting temporal supports were removed
end for
Compressive sensing
ShannonвҖҷs theorem states that for one to reconstruct a signal without error, the sampling
rate must be at least twice the maximum frequency in the signal (i.e., the Nyquist rate).28,29
Although signals such as paper sheet variations may not have natural bandlimits, low-pass
п¬Ғlters are often used to bandlimit these signals so ShannonвҖҷs theorem still plays a role. With
CS, so long as certain conditions pertaining to sparsity, incoherence and the restricted isom-
etry property (RIP) are met, the signal can be perfectly reconstructed with high probability
using less samples than is required by the Nyquist rate.30 In what follows the CS theory is
п¬Ғrst presented, followed by a summary of previous work using CS for MD-CD separation
and п¬Ғnally the proposed technique for applying CS with a scanning sensor is presented.
Recall the matrix Y вҲҲ RnBГ—nS of scanner signal data withnB rows where nB is equal
to the number of CD bins andnS columns where nS is equal to the number of MD scans.
The vector form y = vec(Y) with y вҲҲ Rm where m = nB Г— nS represents the values from
12
Page 13:
each scan stacked upon one another. With CS the matrix of the estimated paper sheet is
F вҲҲ RnCDГ—nM D with nCD rows where nCD is the desired CD resolution of the estimated
sheet (in this work nCD = nB). The number of columns nMD represents the desired MD
resolutionofthereconstructionsuchthat nMD вү« nS. Theestimatedsheetproп¬Ғleisoriginally
reconstructed in vector formf = vec(F) with f вҲҲ Rn where n = nCD Г— nMD and n вү« m.
Sparsity refers to the number of non-zero coeп¬ғcients a signal has in a given representation
(or sparsifying) basis, ОЁ. Sparse signals can be compressed and reconstructed accurately
while storing few non-zero values. A signal,f, is consideredS-sparse in the representation
basis ОЁifthe coeп¬ғcientsequence x вҲҲ Rn has S вүӘ nnon-zerovaluesand f = ОЁx. 28 Consider
the representation basis ОЁ вҲҲ RnГ—n as an orthonormal basis (e.g., Fourier basis or wavelet
basis) that provides a sparse representation off. A set of basis functions,ОЁ, are orthogonal
over the interval[a, b] with respect to the weighting functionw(z) if for i Мё= j
вҲ« b
a
ПҲi(z)ПҲj(z)w(z)dz = 0. (6)
However, in the case wherei = j, the scalar product of the two vectors does not vanish, i.e.,
вҲ« b
a
ПҲ2
i (z)w(z)dz = N 2
i . (7)
Now if the set of basis functions,ОЁ, is normalized such that eachПҲi(z) is multiplied byNвҲ’1
i
then the resulting set of basis functions will satisfy
вҲ« b
a
ПҲi(z)ПҲj(z)w(z)dz = Оҙij вүЎ
пЈұ
пЈҙпЈҙпЈІ
пЈҙпЈҙпЈі
0, for i Мё= j
1, for i = j
(8)
where Оҙij is the Kronecker delta. A set of basis functions satisfying equation 8 are consid-
ered orthonormal basis functions, i.e., both orthogonal and unit normalized31. 32 A set of
orthogonal functions is complete if a piece-wise continuous function,f(z) for z вҲҲ [a, b], can
13
Page 14:
be represented by the series
f(z) =
вҲһвҲ‘
n=пң°
xnПҲn(z) (9)
such that the limit of the integrated squared error vanishes,31 i.e.,
lim
mвҶ’вҲһ
вҲ« b
a
[
f(z) вҲ’
mвҲ‘
n=пң°
xnПҲn(z)
]2
w(z)dz = 0. (10)
From equation 10 it is apparent that orthogonal completeness is an important property for
ensuring the accuracy of the approximation off(z). In fact this property is critical for both
spectral analysis and compressive sensing as it allows the functionf(z) to be written directly
in the orthogonal basis, i.e.,
f(z) =
вҲһвҲ‘
n=пң°
вҹЁf, ПҲnвҹ©ПҲn(z). (11)
Another condition of CS, referred to as coherence, relates to the projection matrix,ОҰ вҲҲ
RnГ—n. The projection matrix describes how samples are taken from the signal domain, i.e.,
y = RОҰf + ОҪ, (12)
where R вҲҲ RmГ—n is the measurement matrix that contains the sampling coordinates and
ОҪ represents additive noise that corrupts the measured datay. The measurement matrix
contains information regarding the geometry of the scanner trajectory. The measured signal
canbeexpressedintermsoftherepresentationbasiscoeп¬ғcientsequencebyinserting f = ОЁx
into equation 12 to obtain
y = RОҰОЁx + ОҪ = Ax + ОҪ, (13)
where A вҲҲ RmГ—n is referred to as the compressive sensing matrix.
Compressive sensing is concerned with minimizing the coherence, Вө, of the sampling
14
Page 15:
which is determined by the maximum correlation betweenОҰ and ОЁ as
Вө(ОҰ, ОЁ) = вҲҡn max
1вүӨi,jвүӨn
|вҹЁПҶi, ПҲjвҹ©|. (14)
If ОҰ and ОЁ are orthonormal bases thenВө(ОҰ, ОЁ) вҲҲ [1, вҲҡn]. For CS it is desirable to select
incoherent basis pairs forОҰ and ОЁ as this reduces the number of measurements required for
accurate reconstruction. An example of a low coherence pair is the identity or spike basis as
the projection matrix (ОҰ) and the Fourier basis as a representation matrix (ОЁ) since spikes
and sinusoids are maximally incoherent (i.e.,Вө = 1). 30,33 The importance of sparsity and low
coherence is shown in the following formula where the probability of exact reconstruction
exceeds 1 вҲ’ Оҙ if
m вүҘ CВө 2(ОҰ, ОЁ)Slog(n/Оҙ). (15)
Formaximallyincoherentprojectionandrepresentationbasesthenumberofsamplesrequired
for exact reconstruction is on the order ofSlog(n).
To guarantee eп¬ғcient and robust reconstruction it is desirable to satisfy the restricted
isometry property (RIP). The CS matrixA is loosely said to obey the RIP ifОҙS, the smallest
number such that
(1 вҲ’ ОҙS)||x||пңІ
пңІ вүӨ ||Ax||пңІ
пңІ вүӨ (1 + ОҙS)||x||пңІ
пңІ (16)
is not too close to one.30 While the RIP is NP-hard to verify it is often satisп¬Ғed by taking a
suп¬ғcient number of samples for a given sparsity level (S), coherence (Вө) and randomness of
sampling speciп¬Ғed byR. Random coordinate sampling is often used to satisfy the RIP.
The objective in CS is to п¬Ғnd the sparsest vectorx that yields the measurement vector
y. However, since thel0 minimization is NP-hard an equivalentl1 relaxation is solved with
an inequality constraint to account for measurement noise, i.e.,
min ||x||1
s.t. ||Ax вҲ’ y||2 вүӨ Пғ
(17)
15
Page 16:
where Пғ is related to the noise level. This optimization is known as the basis pursuit with
denoising (BPDN) problem. In this work the spectral projected gradient forlпңұ (SPGL1)
minimization algorithm is used to obtain a solution to the BPDN problem by solving a
sequence of dual problems. The SPGL1 method is chosen because it is reported as a fast
method for large scale sparse reconstruction.34
Previous work showed the ability of CS with Fourier, Haar, Symlet and Daubechies
representation bases to reconstruct paper proп¬Ғles. For both the simulated and industrial
trials the Fourier bases provide the lowest reconstruction error. The Fourier basis makes
intuitive sense considering operations such as pressing and drying rollers are likely to result
in sinusoidal variations. One limitation of this work is that the scanning geometry was not
considered and instead random sampling was used which is not possible with a scanning
sensor. For a high speed paper machine to satisfy the RIP condition it was proposed that
either a sensor array or a large number of scanning sensors be used.27
Based on previous work the Fourier basis is chosen as the representation basis for CS.
Achieving the necessary number of samples to meet the RIP is likely not possible and regard-
less the requisitea priori sparsity knowledge is not available to verify the RIP. Therefore,
instead of attempting to guarantee perfect reconstruction according to the CS conditions,
this work focuses on maximizing the obtained information to reconstruct the sheet proп¬Ғle
through CS. To extend previous developments it is desirable to provide a more realistic
representation of the sampling ratio and scanning structure determined by the geometry of
the scanning sensor. Furthermore, it is desirable to determine whether or not CS can pro-
vide eп¬Җective MD-CD separation especially with respect to the eп¬Җects of MD aliasing. To
demonstrate CS with a scanning sensor under MD aliasing consider Figure 6.
Even with a relatively slow sheet the sampling ratio achieved is still only 0.2% of the
total sheet. To improve this sampling ratio for CS a simple assumption is proposed.
Assumption 4.The CD proп¬Ғle variations are slow enough to be assumed static over a short
period (e.g.,вүҲ10%) of a single scan.
16
Page 17:
Figure 6: Simulated sheet with 64 CD bins and 4 scans
Note that this assumption is much less assertive than the assumption used by most MD-
CD separation methods. Assumption 4 is applied in this example to four neighboring values,
i.e., it is assumed thatF0(2,6) = F0(2,7) = F0(2,8) = F0(2,9) = F0(2,10) = -0.2668. This
is performed for each measurement from each scan providing a band of measurements across
the sheet. The measurement vectory and CS matrixA are updated to reп¬Ӯect these values.
Next, CS is performed by solving the BPDN problem shown in equation 17. The sheet is
reconstructed from the coeп¬ғcients, i.e.,f = ОЁx, and reshaped into the estimated sheetF
shown in Figure 7.
Figure 7: Simulated sheet reconstruction with compressive sensing
17
Page 18:
Comparative analysis
Comparing the EF, PSA and CS methods for MD-CD separation is not straightforward since
the favorable implementation of each technique is unique. For example, the EF method
is eп¬Җective after a large number of scans have been processed whereas the PSA method
compares two consecutive scans. Furthermore, the PSA method requires alternating scan
speeds whereas the CS method performs better when the fastest scan speed is maintained.
In the comparative analysis presented here special measures are taken to ensure each method
is implemented as designed given the same simulated sheet and scanning setup.
Experimental setup
During industrial operation only the measurements obtained from the scanning sensor are
available. Unfortunately since the entire true sheet is not measured verifying the CS recon-
struction accuracy is challenging in practice. To determine the true sheet, post-production
laboratory tests can be performed but these tests are limited in scope and expensive to per-
form. 4 To compensate for the lack of industrial data Honeywell has provided a CD proп¬Ғle
that replicates a realistic industrial proп¬Ғle. This proп¬Ғle is shown in Figure 8 and a com-
pressed version of it (i.e., less CD bins) is used in the comparative analysis. To speciп¬Ғcally
study the ability of MD-CD separation methods to reduce MD aliasing, the sinusoidal MD
variations are chosen to have frequencies near integer multiples of(2tscan)вҲ’1. Zero mean nor-
mally distributed random noise with standard deviationПғe generates the residual variation.
Figure 8: Realistic CD proп¬Ғle provided by Honeywell
18
Page 19:
Sheet proп¬Ғle estimates from each MD-CD separation method are compared based on how
well they п¬Ғt the true MD and CD variation proп¬Ғles. Speciп¬Ғcally, the root mean square error
(RMSE) is calculated as follows:
Пө =
оөӘоө«оө«вҲҡ1
k
kвҲ‘
i=пңұ
(pi вҲ’ ЛҶpi)пңІ, (18)
where k is the number of samples in the proп¬Ғle,pi is the true property value andЛҶpi represents
the estimated value. The smaller the RMSE the better the estimated proп¬Ғle represents the
true proп¬Ғle with an RMSE of zero indicating a perfect п¬Ғt. For EF the scan average is used as
the MD proп¬Ғle so a zero order hold will be placed on the average value in order to extend to
the true length of the sheet. Similarly for PSA the reconstructed MD proп¬Ғle is interpolated
to generate a signal of desired length. Simulation parameters are summarized in Table 2.
Table 2: Comparative analysis simulation parameters
Parameter Description Value
wsheet sheet width (m) 8
vscan scan speed(s) (m/s) 0.33, 1
tscan scan time (s) 24, 8
vsheet sheet speed (m/s) 1
Оё traversing angle from MD (В°) 18.4, 45
nCD = nB number of CD bins 100
nEF
S , nCS
S number of scans for EF and CS 20, 8
ПүMD frequency of MD sinusoid(s) (Hz) 0.062, 0.12
Results and discussion
For EF the sheet is simulated for twenty scans but the CS method is only performed on the
п¬Ғnal eight scans and the PSA technique only compares the п¬Ғnal two scans. Since the PSA
technique requires alternating scan speeds a separate scanning trajectory is performed over
the п¬Ғnal eight scans as the blue line in Figure 9 demonstrates. The reverse scan speed of the
PSA method is equivalent to the regular scan speed from the CS and EF methods. The п¬Ғnal
scan shares the same trajectory to allow direct comparison of the proп¬Ғle reconstruction.
19
Page 20:
Figure 9: Simulated sheet for comparative analysis
The sheet is constructed with the realistic industrial CD proп¬Ғle and two MD sinusoidal
variations with frequencies near (2tscan)вҲ’1 to create MD aliasing. Normally distributed zero
mean random noise with standard deviationПғe = 0.15 is added to the simulated sheet. All
20 scans of the original sheet are passed through an exponential п¬Ғlter with a п¬Ғlter factor
Оұ = 0.33 to generate an EF estimate of the п¬Ғnal scan. The PSA method is performed as
described by Algorithm 1 withcпңұ = 1.5 and cпңІ = 1.0 to reconstruct the PSA estimate for
the п¬Ғnal scan. The eight scans shown in Figure 9 are used by the CS method to reconstruct
the entire sheet with the help of Assumption 4. The estimated CD proп¬Ғle and MD trends
are presented along with RMSE values in Figure 10.
The CS method provides the best reconstruction of the CD proп¬Ғle followed by the PSA
technique and lastly the EF method. Although PSA removes part of the MD aliasing, the
proп¬Ғle still over-estimates some of the CD variations, likely due to indistinguishable MD
variations. Alternatively, the CS estimate captures the essential shape of the true CD proп¬Ғle
buttheamplitudeisunderestimated. SoftthresholdingusedbySPGL1sparsiп¬Ғesthesolution
by removing small coeп¬ғcients at the expense of reducing the amplitude of the remaining
coeп¬ғcients. This is apparent in the MD proп¬Ғle where the CS method once again gives the
20
Page 21:
Figure 10: MD-CD separation comparative analysis results
best reconstruction. The PSA estimate of the MD trend has a higher RMSE than the scan
average as it is not able to isolate and reconstruct the low frequency MD variation. This
limitation could be addressed in future work by developing an adaptive threshold strategy.
Multiple scanners - looking deeper into CS
To better observe the potential of CS two scanners are implemented which represent a
realistically achievable sensing framework and provide insight into the beneп¬Ғt of additional
samples with CS. The following test involves a CD dimension of 100 bins and an 8 m wide
sheet moving at 8 m/s (withОё = 7.1В°). Each scanner performs four scans at a speed of 1
m/s with opposite trajectories. The MD, CD and residual variations are simulated as before
to cause signiп¬Ғcant MD aliasing. In Figure 11 the simulated sheet and the trajectory of the
two scanners is shown on the left and the CS reconstruction of the sheet is presented on the
right. The CS reconstruction provides a relatively accurate representation of the entire true
sheet especially considering it only uses the measurements along the trajectory of the scan
paths (in black). Note the increment change in the z-axis indicates reduced magnitude in
21
Page 22:
the CS reconstruction. By using the geometry of the scanning sensors the CS method makes
eп¬ғcient use of the available scanner information to provide an informative sheet estimate.
Figure 11: Simulated sheet and CS estimate with 100 CD bins
TodeterminetheresultsofMD-CDseparation, averagesaretakenalongeachMDposition
of the CS reconstruction for the MD proп¬Ғle and along each CD bin for the CD proп¬Ғle. The
same averaging is conducted for the raw scanner data to generate the proп¬Ғle comparison
presented in Figure 12. From the average CD proп¬Ғles (top) the CS estimate (red) reduces
a signiп¬Ғcant amount of the aliasing exhibited by the CD proп¬Ғle of the scan average (blue)
which is evident numerically from the RMSE values in the legend. The average MD trends
are shown in the bottom plot where the scanned values (blue) are the average from each
scan. It is clear from these results that given the right circumstances the CS method is able
to successfully reduce the detrimental eп¬Җects of MD aliasing. Moreover, the MD trend in the
CS reconstruction provides vastly more information than the scan average as in EF. This
test demonstrates the strong potential of CS for reducing MD aliasing and improving the
resolution and accuracy of the MD trend for subsequent control of the MD process.
In the following section the challenge of MD adaptive control is addressed. Prior to
22
Page 23:
Figure 12: MD-CD separation results for CS with two scanning sensors
introducing the adaptive control framework it is important to elaborate on the signiп¬Ғcant
connection between MD-CD separation and MD adaptive control. The best way to illustrate
this connection is by referring to the MD trends in the bottom plot of Figure 12. The
blue proп¬Ғle shows the four averaged measurements that would generally be available to an
MD control system. Not only does the low resolution result in slow upset detection but
it also necessitates longer identiп¬Ғcation experiments to collect data necessary for accurate
system identiп¬Ғcation and performance monitoring. Alternatively, by using a method such
as CS (shown by the red proп¬Ғle in the bottom of Figure 12) more than three thousand MD
measurements can be provided to the MD control system over the same span of paper. The
high resolution MD trend can facilitate improved feedback control, faster upset detection,
better performance monitoring and more accurate system identiп¬Ғcation.
23
Page 24:
MD Adaptive Control
The adaptive control strategy consists of techniques developed for MD process monitoring
(PM), input design (ID) and system identiп¬Ғcation (SI). By combining these sub-functions
an adaptive control strategy for the MD process is developed. The adaptive framework
automatically identiп¬Ғes MPM, triggers an identiп¬Ғcation experiment, designs an excitation
signal, identiп¬Ғes a new process model and updates the controller. An illustrative schematic
of the closed-loop adaptive control framework is provided in Figure 13.
K( ЛҶG(i)) G
H
+ ut
et
+
PM
ut, yt, ЛҶG(i)
ID
ut, yt, ЛҶG(i)
SI
ut, yt, ЛҶG(i)
tf ts
r+
+
yt
вҲ’
yt
rвҲ—
t
+
ЛҶG(i+1)
Figure 13: Adaptive framework for closed-loop MPC
During normal operation the model predictive controller,K( ЛҶG(i)), controls the process,
G, and the PM algorithm collects process input data,ut, and output data, yt. When G
deviates from the estimated process model,ЛҶG(i), the PM algorithm detects the MPM and
triggers an excitation experiment by sending the start time,ts, to the ID algorithm. An
optimally designed excitation signal,rвҲ—
t, is calculated by the ID algorithm and added to the
actuator movements, ut, to provide additional process excitation for a speciп¬Ғed experiment
duration. Once the experiment ends (i.e.,tf is reached) the SI algorithm collects the input-
output (IO) data from the experiment duration to determine a new process model estimate.
The new estimate, ЛҶG(i+1), is implemented in the controller and normal operation resumes.
Successful implementation allows the controller to respond to changes in the process while
maintaining feedback control, without requiring operator intervention.
In what follows the MD process is described in greater detail after which each of the sub-
24
Page 25:
functions within the adaptive control framework are described separately. This is followed by
adescriptionofthesetofexperimentsthataredesignedtotesttheadaptivecontroltechnique
relative to benchmark model identiп¬Ғcation procedures. Upon analyzing the experimental
results, conclusions and recommendations for further study are provided.
The MD process
The industrial simulator used in this work involves both the true process dynamics and the
MPC control system. The MD process is modeled as a multi-input multi-output (MIMO)
lower triangular system composed of six п¬Ғrst order plus deadtime (FOPDT) transfer func-
tions with three manipulated variables (MVs) and three controlled variables (CVs). The
process output, including an additive disturbance, is fed back to an MPC system that de-
termines the new process input values.
During normal operation the following expression is obtained from Figure 13:
пЈ®
пЈҜпЈҜпЈҜпЈҜпЈ°
y1(t)
y2(t)
y3(t)
пЈ№
пЈәпЈәпЈәпЈәпЈ»
= G(q)
пЈ®
пЈҜпЈҜпЈҜпЈҜпЈ°
u1(t)
u2(t)
u3(t)
пЈ№
пЈәпЈәпЈәпЈәпЈ»
+ H(q)
пЈ®
пЈҜпЈҜпЈҜпЈҜпЈ°
e1(t)
e2(t)
e3(t)
пЈ№
пЈәпЈәпЈәпЈәпЈ»
, (19)
where r(t)is the reference signal (or setpoint) and eachei(t)is an independent and identically
distributed (IID) Gaussian white noise sequence with zero mean and varianceПғпңІ
ei. 35 Process
outputs yпңұ(t), yпңІ(t) and yпңі(t) represent the measured basis weight (lbs/3000ft2), press mois-
ture (%) and reel moisture (%), respectively. Furthermore, process inputsuпңұ(t), uпңІ(t) and
uпңі(t) represent the thick stock п¬Ӯow (gpm), press section steam pressure (psi) and reel section
steam pressure (psi), respectively. Apart from some user-speciп¬Ғed tuning parameters, the
details of the MPC controller,K( ЛҶG), will be limited to the update ofЛҶG.
Both the nominal model used by the controller,ЛҶG(q), and the true plant transfer function,
25
Page 26:
G(q), have the following form:
G(q) =
пЈ®
пЈҜпЈҜпЈҜпЈҜпЈ°
G11(q) 0 0
G21(q) G22(q) 0
G31(q) G32(q) G33(q)
пЈ№
пЈәпЈәпЈәпЈәпЈ»
. (20)
Each Gij in equation 20 represents an FOPDT transfer function which is deп¬Ғned in contin-
uous time according to
Gij(s) = bij
aijs +1eвҲ’dijs, (21)
where bij, aij and dij are the continuous gain, time constant and time delay parameters,
respectively. 36 The nominal model used by the controller,ЛҶG(q), takes the same form except
the sub-transfer functions are denotedЛҶGij with parametersЛҶbij, ЛҶaij and ЛҶdij. Initially there is
a 10% negative MPM in each of the process parameters, i.e., each of the parameters in the
nominal model are 10% lower than the true process parameters presented in Table 3. The
Table 3: Continuous MD Process Parameters
Gij bij aij dij
Gпңұпңұ 1.1600 73.26 77
GпңІпңұ 0.3256 50.622 99
GпңІпңІ -0.1540 297.0 121
Gпңіпңұ 0.8283 170.28 43
GпңіпңІ -0.2618 232.32 33
Gпңіпңі -0.0611 27.324 99
noise model, H(q), is a diagonal matrix of stable and inversely stable п¬Ғlters, i.e.,
H(q) =
пЈ®
пЈҜпЈҜпЈҜпЈҜпЈ°
H1(q) 0 0
0 H2(q) 0
0 0 H3(q)
пЈ№
пЈәпЈәпЈәпЈәпЈ»
, (22)
where each Hi(q) can be either high pass or low pass п¬Ғlters of varying order.
26
Page 27:
Closed-loop model identiп¬Ғcation
In addition to updating the process model, SI is of critical importance for MPM detection.
The predominant SI methods can be broadly categorized as belonging to either the predic-
tion error family, subspace approaches or non-parametric correlation and spectral analysis
methods. An important diп¬Җerence between open-loop and closed-loop data is the correlation
between the noise and the input with closed-loop data as a result of feedback control. This
correlation can be problematic for extending open-loop identiп¬Ғcation methods such as sub-
space and nonparametric methods to closed-loop data.37 Therefore, the analysis presented
here focuses on the prediction error method (PEM).
Depending on the feedback assumptions, closed-loop identiп¬Ғcation methods can be clas-
siп¬Ғed as either direct identiп¬Ғcation (DI), indirect identiп¬Ғcation or joint input-output ideni-
tiп¬Ғcation. 38 For PM, it is desirable for closed-loop identiп¬Ғcation to be performed on routine
operating data. Joint input-output identiп¬Ғcation methods are ruled out as they depend on
external excitation. Furthermore, both indirect and joint input-output identiп¬Ғcation tech-
niques can become overly complex in the presence of nonlinear feedback.37,39 As it is common
for industrial MPC to display nonlinear dynamics, the indirect and joint input-output iden-
tiп¬Ғcation techniques are not ideal. The focus of this report is on comparing the direct
identiп¬Ғcation (DI) method to a new method that utilizes both an autoregressive exogenous
(ARX) model and an output-error (OE) model, i.e., closed-loop ARX-OE identiп¬Ғcation.
Both the DI and ARX-OE identiп¬Ғcation methods can be seen as varying parameteriza-
tions of the PEM which minimizes the squared 2-norm of the prediction error, i.e.,
VN(G, H) = 1
N
NвҲ‘
t=пңұ
ЛҶПө2(t, Оё), (23)
where ЛҶПө(t, Оё) represents the diп¬Җerence between the measured and predicted outputs, i.e.,
ЛҶПө(t, Оё) = y(t) вҲ’ ЛҶy(t|Оё). Please note the distinction made between the actual process white
noise sequence, ei(t), and the prediction errorЛҶПө(t, Оё). 40 For plant and noise models deп¬Ғned
27
Page 28:
by the parameter vectorОё, the predicted output,ЛҶy(t|Оё), is given by35
ЛҶy(t|Оё) = ЛҶH -1(q, Оё) ЛҶG(q, Оё)u(t) +
[
1 вҲ’ ЛҶH -1(q, Оё)
]
y(t), (24)
and after algebraic manipulation the following expression for the prediction error is obtained
ЛҶПө(t, Оё) = ЛҶH -1(q, Оё)
[
y(t) вҲ’ ЛҶG(q, Оё)u(t)
]
. (25)
Please note, with respect to MD-CD separationОё represents the angle of the scanning tra-
jectory whereas in SI the symbolОё refers to the parameter vector.
Ultimately, the goal is to obtainОёпң° such that the parameterized models are equal to the
true system, i.e, ЛҶG(q, Оёпң°) = G(q) and ЛҶH(q, Оёпң°) = H(q). Minimizing equation 23 with respect
to Оё results in the following PEM estimate of the parameter vector
ЛҶОёN = arg min
Оё
VN(Оё, ZN), (26)
where ZN = {u(1), y(1), . . . , u(N), y(N)} represents the provided IO data within a given
time span t = 1, . . . , N. 37,40 A polynomial representation of the MIMO MD system is used
here, e.g., the expression foryпңі in equation 19 becomes
Aпңі(q)yпңі(t) = Bпңіпңұ(q)
Fпңіпңұ(q) uпңұ(t вҲ’ nkпңұ) + BпңіпңІ(q)
FпңіпңІ(q) uпңІ(t вҲ’ nkпңІ)
+ Bпңіпңі(q)
Fпңіпңі(q) uпңі(t вҲ’ nkпңі) + Cпңі(q)
Dпңі(q) e(t),
(27)
where nk represents the various delays of each input. Expressions foryпңұ and yпңІ follow in the
same fashion. The polynomials presented in equation 27 are deп¬Ғned as follows:
A(q, Оё) = 1 + ЛҶaпңұqвҲ’пңұ + В· В· В· + ЛҶanaqвҲ’na, (28)
B(q, Оё) = ЛҶbпңұ + ЛҶbпңІqвҲ’пңұ + В· В· В· + ЛҶbnbqвҲ’nb, (29)
28
Page 29:
C(q, Оё) = 1 + ЛҶcпңұqвҲ’пңұ + В· В· В· + ЛҶcncqвҲ’nc, (30)
D(q, Оё) = 1 + ЛҶdпңұqвҲ’пңұ + В· В· В· + ЛҶdndqвҲ’nd, (31)
F (q, Оё) = 1 + ЛҶfпңұqвҲ’пңұ + В· В· В· + ЛҶfnf qвҲ’nf . (32)
Where model orders na, nb, nc, nd, nf and nk must be speciп¬Ғed. The time delays,nki, are
estimated by comparing a series of ARX models with diп¬Җerent delays and determining which
delay value corresponds to the ARX estimate that provides the best п¬Ғt to the IO data.
ARX-OE identiп¬Ғcation
The ARX-OE method is a new technique for performing closed-loop identiп¬Ғcation using
routine operating data withouta priori knowledge of the noise model order. The ARX-OE
method is carried out through the following two step procedure:
1. A high order ARX estimate of the noise model is generated and IO data is п¬Ғltered with
the inverse of the noise model estimate.
2. AnOEmodelwiththeп¬ҒlteredIOdataissolvedviathePEMusingacombinationofline
search algorithms including adaptive subspace Gauss-Newton, Levenberg-Marquardt
least squares and steepest descent least squares.
After introducing the ARX-OE identiп¬Ғcation method for the SISO system a straight-
forward extension to the MIMO case is presented. First, the Box-Jenkins system from
equation 19 is represented with the following ARX model structure:
A(q, Оё)y(t) = B(q, Оё)u(t вҲ’ nk) + e(t). (33)
Dividing both sides of equation 33 byA(q, Оё) yields
y(t) = B(q, Оё)
A(q, Оё) u(t вҲ’ nk) + 1
A(q, Оё) e(t) (34)
29
Page 30:
and by relating back to equation 19, it is apparent that
ЛҶG(q, Оё) = B(q, Оё)
A(q, Оё) and ЛҶH(q, Оё) = 1
A(q, Оё) . (35)
The order of A(q, Оё) is selected suп¬ғciently high to capture the dynamics of the true noise
model (e.g., na вүҲ 15). The Box-Jenkins model provides the п¬Ӯexibility necessary to vary the
noise model order and compare the DI method with and without correct noise model order
speciп¬Ғcation. A series of experiments are conducted to ensure closely matching impulse
response (IR) coeп¬ғcients for both the true and estimated inverse noise models.
Upon estimating the inverse noise model, the IO data is п¬Ғltered withA(q, Оё), i.e.,
uf(t) = A(q, Оё)u(t) and yf(t) = A(q, Оё)y(t). (36)
Inserting IO expressions from equation 36 into equation 34 yields
yf(t)
A(q, Оё) = B(q, Оё)
A(q, Оё)
uf(t вҲ’ nk)
A(q, Оё) + 1
A(q, Оё) e(t) (37)
and multiplying both sides of equation 37 byA(q, Оё) yields the following OE model
yf(t) = B(q, Оё)
A(q, Оё) uf(t вҲ’ nk) + e(t). (38)
Finally, this OE model can be solved via the PEM and equation 23 as described before.
For the MIMO system, equation 38 extends to a system of three output equations with
the expression foryf
пңі (t) shown for reference as follows:
yf
пңі (t) = Bпңіпңұ(q, Оё)
Aпңіпңұ(q, Оё) uf
пңұ(t вҲ’ nkпңіпңұ) + BпңіпңІ(q, Оё)
AпңіпңІ(q, Оё) uf
пңІ(t вҲ’ nkпңіпңІ)
+ Bпңіпңі(q, Оё)
Aпңіпңі(q, Оё) uf
пңі(t вҲ’ nkпңіпңі) + eпңі(t).
(39)
Model orders ofA(q, Оё) and B(q, Оё) for the second part of the ARX-OE method are speciп¬Ғed
30
Page 31:
as na = nb = 1. The п¬Ғnal п¬Ғltered OE expressions are obtained by substituting the п¬Ғrst
order model estimates for A(q, Оё) and B(q, Оё) into equation 39. The expressions for yf
пңұ (t)
and yf
пңІ (t) are obtained in an analogous manner. The values ofЛҶbij and ЛҶaij obtained from this
identiп¬Ғcation procedure provide estimates of the process gain and time constant, respectively.
The closed-loop DI method is implemented as a benchmark in this work. It begins by
deп¬Ғning model orders and proceeds by solving equation 26 directly with process IO data.
Although the noise model is unknown, an estimate of the noise model order is necessary
for DI. The sensitivity of identiп¬Ғcation to an incorrect noise model is considered in the
experimental investigation.
Implementation
Closed-loop SI is fundamental to both the PM and SI aspects of the adaptive control frame-
work. For PM a series of ARX-OE identiп¬Ғcations are performed using over-lapping moving
windows of IO data. The moving window has a length of 1440 samples and takes steps of
length 60 samples with a sample time of 5s. In other words the identiп¬Ғcations are performed
every 5 minutes on the previous 2 hours worth of IO data. In the п¬Ғrst stage of the ARX-OE
method the inverse noise model estimateA(q, Оё) is estimated with an order ofna = 18 and
the polynomial B(q, Оё) is estimated with an order ofnb = 10.
The large orders of the п¬Ғrst stage ARX model require estimation of many parameters
whichcanresultinhighvarianceestimatesduetothelimitedamountofdata. Minimizingthe
cost function, VN(Оё, ZN), involves a trade-oп¬Җ between bias and variance that is determined
by the selection of model order. Regularization constantsОӣ and R are determined to reduce
the variance of the model estimates and the regularized ARX model is solved, i.e.
VN(Оё, ZN) = 1
N
NвҲ‘
t=1
ЛҶПө2(t, Оё) + Оӣ(Оё вҲ’ ОёвҲ—)T R(Оё вҲ’ ОёвҲ—), (40)
where ОёвҲ— is the mean of the prior distribution ofОё which is assumed to be Gaussian.41
31
Page 32:
Since the PM algorithm uses small amounts of routine operating data the signal to noise
ratio is improved by п¬Ғltering out high frequency noise. This denoising step is performed after
the IO data is п¬Ғltered with the inverse noise model estimate. To improve the OE estimation
the range of parameters are bounded usinga priori knowledge of acceptable values. The
excitation experiment has a duration of 3000 samples (i.e.,вүҲ 4.2 hours). All IO data from
the excitation experiment is collected by the SI algorithm to perform both DI and ARX-OE
identiп¬Ғcation. Both the OE model in the ARX-OE method and the DI model are estimated
with п¬Ғrst order numerator and denominator polynomials. The DI method assumes a п¬Ғrst
order numerator and denominator structure for the noise model. Once the identiп¬Ғcation
results are determined and the controller update is complete, regular operation resumes.
Performance monitoring
As applications of model-based control methods increase, so too does the need for adequate
performance assessment and model validation. Failure to acknowledge and correct signiп¬Ғcant
MPM can result in sub-optimal control and production losses. It is estimated that up to
60%ofindustrialcontrollersexhibitcontrollerperformanceproblemsfromissuessuchaspoor
tuning, lack of maintenance and inappropriate control structure, among others.42 Controller
PM is a well established п¬Ғeld that has drawn increased interest since the development of
the minimum variance benchmark by Harris in 1989.43 Some other notable developments
for MPC assessment include benchmarking with historical MPC objective function data,
monitoring the prediction error to determine model quality and using principal component
analysis (PCA) or partial least squares (PLS) to detect controller degradation.44,45
Closed-loop prediction error monitoring presents challenges with respect to diagnosing
large prediction errors as they can be due to MPM, set-point changes as well as measured
and unmeasured disturbances.46 Since both the noise model and the process model can
change during operation it is necessary to distinguish process model changes from noise
model changes. If the noise model changes and the process model does not change it is
32
Page 33:
unlikely that conducting an identiп¬Ғcation experiment will improve controller performance.47
Since monitoring is performed almost constantly it is beneп¬Ғcial to employ a technique that
passively monitors the process. In this work an innovative MPM detection algorithm using
support vector machines (SVMs) on routine operating data is employed. For a thorough
exposition of this MPM detection method please refer to the seminal work.48,50
Model-plant mismatch detection with a one-class support vector machine
The MPM detection implemented in this work uses the ARX-OE identiп¬Ғcation method on
routine operating data in combination with a one-class SVM in order to distinguish between
changes in process models and noise models. Due to the presence of noise and the lack of
signiп¬Ғcant excitation in routine operating data, directly comparing the ARX-OE estimates to
the controller model does not provide a reliable MPM detection procedure. Instead, a range
of acceptable variation of process model estimates is established as a benchmark and new
IO data is compared to this benchmark. Speciп¬Ғcally, a one-class SVM is used to compare
new process model estimates to the benchmark and if these estimates fall outside of the
acceptable range they are regarded as MPM indications.
To train the SVM while accounting for gain and time constant mismatch the model
estimates are represented as п¬Ғnite impulse response (FIR) coeп¬ғcients. The one-class SVM
is formulated as49
min
w,Оҫ,b
1
2 ||w||2 вҲ’ b + 1
vl
lвҲ‘
i=1
Оҫi,
s.t. wвҠӨОҰ(xi) вүҘ b вҲ’ Оҫi, Оҫi вүҘ 0.
(41)
where w and b are the respective slope and oп¬Җset of the separating hyper-plane in the high-
dimensional feature space ОҰ generated with a Gaussian kernel Оә(x, y) = eвҲ’||xвҲ’y||/c. The
parameters v and c tune the support vectors and the shape of the Gaussian kernel, re-
spectively. The slack variable Оҫ permits local variations along the hyperplane boundary.
Employing the kernel trick allows the dual optimization problem to be solved in the lower
dimensional input space providing computational eп¬ғciency. Solving the dual problem pro-
33
Page 34:
vides the decision functionh(x) (where x is the FIR vector) which is used to deп¬Ғne the MPM
indicator that ultimately raises the MPM alarm according to a user-speciп¬Ғed threshold.48
The SVM implemented in this work can be understood as a binary classiп¬Ғer that indi-
cates whether or not ARX-OE estimates belong to the model implemented in the controller
or whether MPM has occurred. Immediately after a new controller estimate is determined, a
training stage begins during which a series of overlapping moving-window ARX-OE identiп¬Ғ-
cations are performed. During the training stage it is assumed that no MPM exists and the
FIR coeп¬ғcients of the estimated process models create a reference cluster as shown in Fig-
ure 14. During the testing stage the FIR coeп¬ғcients of current process model estimates are
Time in Samples
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
Amplitude
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
0.03
0.035
Impulse Response Coefficients of Estimates of G21
Lower bound
Upper bound
   Cluster of
'Good Models'
Figure 14: Training the SVM on FIR coeп¬ғcients without MPM50
compared with the reference cluster in the high dimensional feature. The decision function
h(x) generates a decision boundary that indicates whether the testing data belongs to the
cluster of reference models or whether MPM has occurred. This mismatch classiп¬Ғcation is
performed for both process and noise model estimates in order to conп¬Ғrm whether identifying
a new process model will improve controller performance.
34
Page 35:
Implementation
For this particular study the duration of the training period is 3500 samples with a sample
time of 5s (i.e., вүҲ 4.9 hours of training). The closed-loop ARX-OE training windows are
1440 samples long with a step size of 60 samples (i.e., 2 hour window length and 5 minute
step size). The process and noise model estimates during training are used to generate the
reference cluster considered free of MPM. During testing, the SVM algorithm takes current
ARX-OE estimates and returns plant and noise model indicators that provide positive values
if no MPM is suspected and negative values if the estimate is classiп¬Ғed as exhibiting MPM.
The plant and noise model indicators are observed over the duration of an hour (i.e., 720
samples) and if over 95% of the values are negative it is determined that MPM has occurred.
The noise model indicators are analyzed п¬Ғrst and if the alarm threshold of negative values
is reached the SVM is retrained. If the noise model does not exhibit mismatch and the
process model indicators reach the alarm threshold an identiп¬Ғcation experiment is triggered
by designing an excitation signal,rвҲ—
t, as described in what follows.
Input design
During the identiп¬Ғcation experiment an excitation signal,rвҲ—
t, is added to the process input,
ut, to generate informative process IO data. Informative IO data has a relatively high signal
to noise ratio which enables improved SI and more accurate parameter estimation. A com-
mon technique for exciting the process is to simply inject a pseudo-random binary sequence
(PRBS) as a perturbation signal. Disrupting the process with perturbation sequences or
set-point changes and removing feedback control can lead to lost production time by failing
to meet stringent product speciп¬Ғcations.51 Typically, for identiп¬Ғcation purposes a higher
quality estimate involves a lower covariance of estimated parameters. Thus, traditional ap-
proaches to ID often involve minimizing some function of the covariance matrix such as the
determinant, trace or largest eigenvalues.52
In this work, the Fisher information matrix is maximized. The Fisher information matrix
35
Page 36:
is deп¬Ғned as the inverse of the parameter covariance matrix as followsF = cov(ОёN)вҲ’1 = ОЁОЁвҖІ
where the matrix ОЁ is composed of a series of vectorsПҲ, i.e., ОЁ = [ ПҲt, . . . , ПҲtвҲ’N +1]. Each
vector ПҲ contains the relevant IO data determined by the orders of the ARX polynomials
A(q, Оё) and B(q, Оё), i.e.,ПҲt =
[
yвҖІ
tвҲ’пңұ, . . . , yвҖІ
tвҲ’na, uвҖІ
tвҲ’d, . . . , uвҖІ
tвҲ’dвҲ’nb
]вҖІ
, such that the vectorПҲt and
the parameter vectorОё model the process output asyt = ОёПҲt. For a process described by an
ARX model the parameter vectorОё is given by the expressionОё = [a1, . . . , ana, b1, . . . , bnb].
The trace of the Fisher information matrixRu = trace(F ) is
Ru =
nвҲ‘
p=пңұ
naвҲ‘
j=пңұ
NвҲ‘
i=j
(yp(t вҲ’ i))2 +
mвҲ‘
q=пңұ
nbвҲ‘
j=пңұ
NвҲ‘
i=j
(uq(t вҲ’ nk +1 вҲ’ i))2 (42)
where n is the number output variables,m is the number input variables,na is the order of
A(q, Оё), nb is the order ofB(q, Оё), nk is the input delay andN is the number of IO samples.53
The ID technique applied in this work can be summarized as follows:
max
ut
ЛңRu
subject to yL вүӨ y(t) вүӨ yH,
uL вүӨ u(t) вүӨ uH,
|u(t) вҲ’ u(t вҲ’ 1)| вүӨ вҲҶuH,
(43)
where the objective functionЛңRu is deп¬Ғned as
ЛңRu =
mвҲ‘
q=пңұ
( 1
вҲҶuH
q
var(uвҲ—
q)
)
. (44)
The input sequenceuвҲ—
q contains all possible combinations of input movements over the spec-
iп¬Ғed prediction horizon where each movement is limited to a binary choice ofВұвҲҶuH
q . Orig-
inally, the trace of the Fisher information matrix deп¬Ғned in equation 42 was maximized
subject to the convex input and output constraints. Since this optimization involves maxi-
mizing a high dimensional convex quadratic function it can be diп¬ғcult for quadratic solvers
36
Page 37:
to handle and there is no guarantee that a global optimum is determined.
Since Ru is convex, the maximum over a compact convex domain deп¬Ғned by the convex
constraints in equation 43 occurs at one of the vertices, i.e., when the constraints are active.
The number of vertices grows exponentially with the dimension of the problem so originally
a solution based on visiting each vertice individually was considered computationally in-
feasible. 53 However, in this work the number of input variables ism = 3, so with a small
prediction horizon the problem can be solved by determining the maximum at all of the
vertices. The input sequenceuвҲ—
q is selected such that only combinations of inputs that obey
the IO boundaries while taking the maximum allowable step size are considered.
Implementation
Excitation signals are determined for each of the 3000 samples of the identiп¬Ғcation experi-
ment. Previous input movements extending for a length greater than the sum of the largest
time delay and the largest time constant are provided to the ID algorithm. Combinations of
all possible future input sequences are determined by computing binary permutations equal
to ВұвҲҶuH
q over the prediction horizon. For eп¬ғcient computation the prediction horizon is
limited to a length of four steps after which the input value is held constant. The ID calcu-
lation determines the four step horizon at each new sample. Previous model estimates are
used in combination with past and future input values to predict future outputs.
The maximum input movements are speciп¬Ғed asвҲҶuH
q = [3.0, 1.4, 0.6]. Upper and lower
bounds of input set-point deviation are set asuH
q = вҲ’uL
q = [30, 15, 8] whereas upper and
lower bounds for output set-point deviations are speciп¬Ғed asyH
p = вҲ’yL
p = [15, 1.0, 2.0]. To
account for both the time delay and the process time constant a total of thenup = 111
most recent input values are provided to the ID algorithm at each iteration. This value is
determined by taking the sum of the maximum time constant estimate, the maximum time
delay estimate and a contingency factor of 35. The total prediction horizon has a length
of 27 which is deп¬Ғned by the maximum time delay estimate plus a contingency factor of
37
Page 38:
5. Input sequences that meet the constraints are stored, values ofЛңRu in equation 44 are
calculated and the sequence that maximizesЛңRu is selected as the perturbation sequence.
Experimental setup
A series of experiments are conducted with an industrial MPC control system provided
by Honeywell and the aforementioned MD process model. Speciп¬Ғcally, a high п¬Ғdelity paper
machine simulator was provided by Honeywell that includes variable time delays according to
changing machine speeds, a wide range of CD response shapes and nonlinear mass balance
and dryer models accounting for consistency, retention and stock density. However, it is
important to note that the speciп¬Ғc conп¬Ғguration of the simulator implemented in this work
is better characterized as medium п¬Ғdelity since linear models were purposefully selected to
demonstrate the proposed linear process model identiп¬Ғcation techniques.
The simulations presented here focus on detecting and resolving a mismatch in the gain of
theprocess. Limitingthefocustoasingletypeofmismatchprovidesmorestringentcontrolof
experimental variables to better compare various experimental conп¬Ғgurations such as tuning
the process with DI or ARX-OE identiп¬Ғcation estimates. Since the MIMO process is highly
coupled any identiп¬Ғcation experiment in a single IO pairing will result in excitation of all of
the process inputs and outputs. For this reason when MPM is determined the identiп¬Ғcation
algorithm updates the gain, time constant and time delay values of all process models.
A generalized illustration of the experimental simulation time-line is provided in Figure
15. One important common feature of all experimental simulations is that a 2Г— gain MPM
exclusively in bпңұпңұ is introduced at sample numbernMPM = 4000. The SVM is trained for a
period of nSVM = 3500 samples at which point MPM detection becomes active. The sample
at which MPM is detected varies slightly across experiments but it is described here asnID.
A user speciп¬Ғed delay nID +вҲҶ вҲ’ nID = 1600 separates the MPM detection point and the
actual ID excitation experiment. Typically the ID experiment would start atnID, however
the delay provides time to perform set-point changes and collect response data.
38
Page 39:
Figure 15: Illustrative time-line of the experimental simulations
After a speciп¬Ғed waiting periodnBпңұ вҲ’ nMPM = 500, a set-point change at samplenBпңұ
increases the set-point ofyпңұ by 10% ofyпң°
пңұ. This set-point is held for 300 samples before it is
decreased by twice as much, held for another 300 samples and then returned to the original
set-point yпң°
пңұ. This series of set-point changes provides information on the dynamic response
of the closed-loop system under MPM. An identical procedure is used at samplenSI (i.e.,
after the controller update) to compare the dynamic closed-loop responses both with and
without adaptive control.
A summary of the simulation parameters is provided in Table 4 below. Controller pa-
Table 4: General experimental setup parameters
Symbol Value Description
nF 14000 Simulation duration in samples
nMPM 4000 Sample to trigger MPM
Оұsp 1.5 Controller reference tracking
Оұd 1.5 Controller disturbance rejection
yпң°
p [174, 2.3, 6.2] Nominal output set-points
uпң°
q [165, 115, 35] Nominal input set-points
вҲҶyпң°
p% [10, 0, 0] Magnitude of set-point change
nID +вҲҶ вҲ’ nID 1600 Delay after MPM detection
nBпңұ вҲ’ nMPM 500 Wait period before set-point change
nвҲҶyпң° 300 Samples to hold each set-point change
Hпңұ, HпңІ, Hпңі 1st or 6th order High pass noise models
uPRBS
q Вұ[2.0, 1.0, 0.5] Magnitude of PRBS excitation
Пғe
p [0.08, 0.02, 0.01] Standard deviation of noise
rameters Оұsp and Оұd are used to tune the MPC for reference tracking performance and
39
Page 40:
disturbance rejection performance, respectively. The п¬Ғrst study evaluates the ID algorithm
relative to a PRBS perturbation benchmark of magnitude uPRBS
q = Вұ [2.0, 1.0, 0.5] and
the second study evaluates closed-loop ARX-OE method relative to a DI benchmark. The
sensitivity of the DI method to noise model speciп¬Ғcation is evaluated with a sixth order
noise model. The п¬Ғrst and sixth order noise models are stable and inversely stable high pass
(HP) п¬Ғlters. Both studies include an evaluation of the MPM detection and the closed-loop
response to a set-point change before and after the adaptive update.
The dynamic response to a set-point change is evaluated qualitatively by observing the
output response shape and quantitatively by comparing the observed response to the ideal
response (based on the true process model). The mean square error (MSE) is used to
determine the diп¬Җerence between the observed outputsyi and the ideal outputsЛңy, i.e.,
Пө = 1
n
nвҲ‘
i=пңұ
(yi вҲ’ Лңyi)пңІ, (45)
where n is the number of data points collected during the dynamic response test.
Experimental results
Theп¬ҒrstexperimentinvolvesusingaPRBSforexcitationtoprovideareferenceforevaluating
theIDalgorithm. The2 Г—gainMPMisdetectedbythePMalgorithmafteronly860samples.
Since a delay of 1600 samples is used, the PRBS excitation experiment begins at sample
number nID +вҲҶ = 6460. After the PRBS experiment an ARX-OE identiп¬Ғcation is performed
and the estimated parameters are used to tune the controller. The input proп¬Ғles with PRBS
excitation are shown below in Figure 16. These can be compared with the input proп¬Ғles in
Figure 17 where the proposed ID strategy is used. In Figure 17 the gain MPM is detected by
the PM algorithm after 760 samples and the ID experiment begins at sample number 6340.
The thick stock п¬Ӯow (uпңұ) variation during the ID excitation ranges primarily between 160
gpm and 170 gpm and thus satisп¬Ғes the required constraints of 165Вұ30 gpm. Variation of
40
Page 41:
Figure 16: Input proп¬Ғles with PRBS excitation
Figure 17: Input proп¬Ғles with ID excitation
the press steam pressure (uпңІ) is restricted to 115Вұ15 psi which is approximately satisп¬Ғed
for the duration of the excitation experiment. Finally, the dryer steam pressure (uпңі) is
constrained between 35Вұ8 psi but this is violated at around 550 min. In general the PRBS
excitation creates larger and more frequent input constraint violations than the ID algorithm.
It is apparent from these input proп¬Ғles that the set-point change inyпңұ is causing undesirable
behavior in uпңІ and uпңі which ultimately degrades the output responses ofyпңІ and yпңі.
After the PRBS and ID experiments an ARX-OE estimate is used to update the con-
41
Page 42:
troller. The output proп¬Ғles over the experiment duration with PRBS excitation and ID
excitation are presented in Figure 18 and Figure 19, respectively. Recall, yпңұ is the basis
Figure 18: Output proп¬Ғles with PRBS excitation
Figure 19: Output proп¬Ғles with ID excitation
weight (BW) measured in lbs/(3000ft2), yпңІ is the press moisture (%) andyпңі is the reel mois-
ture (%). With ID excitation the press moisture and reel moisture exhibit a lower magnitude
of disruption after the adaptive update. Alternatively, with PRBS excitation they1 set-point
change creates a higher magnitude disruption in the reel moisture after the adaptive update.
42
Page 43:
Each of the process outputs obey the speciп¬Ғed upper and lower bound constraints during
the ID excitation experiment whereas the PRBS excitation results in occasional violations
of the output constraints. The increased variation in the output proп¬Ғles during the PRBS
identiп¬Ғcation experiment is only desirable if it results in an improved adaptive update and
subsequent dynamic response.
To evaluate the eп¬Җect of the adaptive control update we observe the dynamic response
to set-point changes before and after the adaptive update. Focusing on the process outputs
during the п¬Ғrst set-point change (i.e., before the adaptive update) yields Figure 20. It is
Figure 20: Closed-loop response to a 10% set-point change iny1 with MPM
immediately clear that the closed-loop dynamic response under MPM exhibits undesirable
over-shoot and oscillatory behavior. Due to the MIMO coupling the BW set-point change
disrupts the press and reel moisture values as well. In all other experiments the closed-loop
response to a set-point change exhibits the same behavior as the experimental conп¬Ғgurations
before the identiп¬Ғcation experiment are identical. Therefore, for concise presentation Figure
20 will serve as a qualitative reference for the closed-loop response to a set-point change with
MPM. Quantitatively, over six trials the MSE (Пө) before the adaptive update varies from
23.45 to 24.40 iny1, from 0.48 to 0.53 iny2 and from 0.14 to 0.15 iny3.
The eп¬Җect of the ARX-OE update is evaluated by comparing the closed-loop response
43
Page 44:
to a set-point change before and after the adaptive update. Moreover, the PRBS and ID
techniques are evaluated based on their responses after the adaptive update as shown in
Figure 21 and Figure 22, respectively. Regardless of whether a PRBS or ID signal is used,
Figure 21: Closed-loop response after an ARX-OE update with PRBS excitation
Figure 22: Closed-loop response after an ARX-OE update with ID excitation
the closed-loop response after the adaptive update exhibits considerable improvement. This
isespeciallyevidentfortheoutput y1 thatreceivestheset-pointchangeastheMSEisreduced
dramatically fromПө = 24.01 toПө = 2.5 with PRBS orПө = 2.1 with ID excitation. The MIMO
44
Page 45:
coupling introduces a higher MSE iny3 after the adaptive update, particularly with a PRBS
excitation. However, it is important to note that the transfer functions associated withy3 did
not exhibit MPM prior to the adaptive update but they were updated anyways. This issue
will be addressed in future work by further analyzing the scores from the MPM detection
algorithm and only updating the parameters from the transfer functions that exhibit MPM.
Evaluating the PRBS and ID excitation based on the dynamic response of the outputs
yields a preference for the proposed ID technique. The ID excitation results in lower MSE
values for all outputs but particularly fory3 which has Пө = 2.7 for PRBS andПө = 0.4 for
ID excitation. Furthermore, the ID strategy is preferred because it adheres more strictly
to the upper and lower bound constraints on the inputs and outputs during the excitation
experiment. Improvedcontrolofprocessinputsandoutputsduringtheexcitationexperiment
is a signiп¬Ғcant beneп¬Ғt of the proposed ID method.
Thesecondstudyofthisreportaimstoevaluatetheeп¬ҖectivenessoftheARX-OEadaptive
update relative to a DI update. Since the DI method requires an estimate of the noise model
order this study includes experiments where the noise model order is correctly and incorrectly
speciп¬Ғed. First, the closed-loop response to a set-point change after both ARX-OE and DI
updates are compared with a correctly speciп¬Ғed п¬Ғrst order noise model. Afterwards the true
noise model order is changed to six and the same analysis is conducted with the DI method
still assuming п¬Ғrst order noise. The proposed ID excitation strategy is conducted throughout
the comparison of identiп¬Ғcation methods. Please note that the prediction length is decreased
from four to three with the sixth order noise model for both the ARX-OE and DI methods
so the relative comparison remains valid.
The closed-loop response with an ARX-OE update shown in Figure 22 can be compared
to the closed-loop response with a DI update in Figure 23. In Figure 23 the 2Г— gain MPM
is detected by the PM algorithm after 860 samples and the identiп¬Ғcation experiment begins
at sample numbernID +вҲҶ = 6460. Since the same ID technique is applied the raw input and
output proп¬Ғles have been omitted as they are redundant. With a п¬Ғrst order noise model
45
Page 46:
Figure 23: Closed-loop response after a DI update with ID excitation
the DI method provides a lower MSE fory1 and y2 but the MSE for y3 is slightly higher
relative to the ARX-OE method. These results are not surprising since the DI method
assumes the correct noise model order whereas the ARX-OE method does not rely on such
a prioriknowledge. Even so the DI output response proп¬Ғles are only marginally better than
the ARX-OE response with the largest diп¬Җerence being the MSE iny1 of Пө = 2.1 for the
ARX-OE method andПө = 0.7 for the DI method.
When a sixth order noise model order is used and the ID prediction length is dropped
from four to three we obtain the closed-loop responses for ARX-OE and DI shown in Figure
24 and Figure 25, respectively. For both of these experiments the PM algorithm successfully
identiп¬Ғes the MPM after 800 samples and after a delay of 1600 samples the identiп¬Ғcation
experimentbeginsatsamplenumber6400. Onceagaintherawinputandoutputproп¬Ғleshave
been omitted as they are redundant considering the same ID technique was implemented.
With a sixth order noise model the ARX-OE update provides a lower MSE iny1 than
the DI method. Due to rounding to two decimal places and averaging over the number
of samples the MSE values are shown as zero fory2 in Figure 24 as well asy2 and y3 in
Figure 25. In fact, comparing the results from п¬Ғrst order and sixth order noise it is apparent
that the MSE decreases in general with the exception ofy1 with the DI method. The sixth
46
Page 47:
Figure 24: Closed-loop response after an ARX-OE update with sixth order noise
Figure 25: Closed-loop response after a DI update with sixth order noise
order noise models potentially introduce more excitation to the process resulting in a more
accurate identiп¬Ғcation. Since the MPM occurs inG11 the closed-loop response ofy1 after the
adaptive update is of particular interest. While the control performance ofy1 improves with
ARX-OE method under a sixth order noise model the DI method reveals a slight decrease
in control performance. This illustrates the beneп¬Ғt of ARX-OE when noa prioriknowledge
of the noise model order is available.
Ultimately, these results successfully illustrate the eп¬Җectiveness of the uniп¬Ғed adaptive
47
Page 48:
control strategy. The MPM was successfully detected by the PM algorithm in a timely fash-
ion for every experiment. Moreover, the closed-loop response to a set-point change improves
considerably with adaptive control. The proposed algorithm succeeds at eliminating the
harmful over-shoot and oscillatory responses observed prior to the adaptive model update.
A minor decrease in control performance can be observed in the variables that were not
under MPM due to an unnecessary adaptive update. Future work will ensure the MPM
detection algorithm is selectively updates only the transfer functions that undergo MPM.
Another interesting avenue for future work which was brought to the authors attention is
investigating an eп¬ғcient single-step implementation of the ARX-OE method that treats the
ARX parameters as hyper-parameters. This could yield improved accuracy at the cost of
increased computation but it remains beyond the scope of this work.
Conclusion
In this paper complementary developments are presented towards MD-CD separation and
MD adaptive control of a paper machine. Prior to implementing MD control the measured
MD trend needs to be extracted through MD-CD separation. A novel MD-CD separation
method based on compressive sensing is presented and demonstrated in comparison to two
other model-free benchmarks with favorable results. The CS method is studied with two
scanning sensors where it is shown to enable reconstruction of a high resolution MD trend
for improved control of the MD process. One limitation is that the CS method needs to be
implemented more eп¬ғciently for online estimation or signiп¬Ғcant computation resources are
required. The CS method can be improved by implementing a debiasing strategy to mitigate
the eп¬Җects of soft-thresholding.
Once the MD proп¬Ғle is separated from the scanner signal it can be provided to the
MPC system for the MD process. A more accurate MD trend can enable improved perfor-
mance monitoring and identiп¬Ғcation of the MD process. The adaptive control framework
48
Page 49:
proposed in this work is capable of consistently identifying MPM, generating an excitation
signal that meets IO constraints and identifying a new process model. An innovative MPM
detection algorithm using an SVM provides fast and accurate detection of gain mismatch.
The proposed input design strategy is compared to a PRBS excitation and shown to pro-
vide better controller performance as well as stricter adherence to IO constraints. Finally, a
novel closed-loop model identiп¬Ғcation procedure is proposed and demonstrated to improve
controller performance during a set-point change relative to the benchmark DI method.
Ultimately, this work has successfully demonstrated the functionality and performance of
the proposed MD-CD separation and adaptive control techniques. Although there is room
for further development, the contributions presented here have resulted in an algorithm that
can automatically detect MPM and update an MPC controller while maintaining feedback
control. This work provides a substantial contribution in developing a framework for the
adaptive tuning of a MIMO model-based control system without requiring expensive open-
loop identiп¬Ғcation experiments or operator intervention.
It is important to note the direct impact of the MD trend determined though MD-CD
separation on the ability to eп¬Җectively harness the adaptive MD control framework. In this
work we have proposed an MD-CD separation method that can increase the available MD
measurements by at least an order of magnitude resulting in direct beneп¬Ғts for the PM, ID
and SI algorithms. A uniп¬Ғed experimental setup that combines MD-CD separation, adaptive
MD control and adaptive CD control is desired for comprehensive closed-loop experiments.
Acknowledgement
The authors thank Honeywell Process Solutions, the National Science and Engineering Re-
search Council of Canada and the Izaak Walton Killam Memorial Fund for funding this
research through a collaborative research and development grant, a Canada Graduate Schol-
arship MasterвҖҷs award and a Killam Pre-Doctoral Memorial Fellowship.
49
Page 50:
References
(1) Duncan, S.; Wellstead, P. Processing data from scanning gauges on industrial web
processes. Automatica 2004, 40, 431вҖ“437.
(2) VanAntwerp, J. G.; Featherstone, A. P.; Braatz, R. D.; Ogunnaike, B. A. Cross-
directional control of sheet and п¬Ғlm processes.Automatica 2007, 43, 191вҖ“211.
(3) Chen, S.-C. Kalman п¬Ғltering applied to sheet measurement. American Control Confer-
ence, 1988. 1988; pp 643вҖ“647.
(4) Aslani, S.; Davies, M.; Dumont, G.; Stewart, G. Estimation of Cross and Machine
Direction Variations Using Recursive Wavelet Filtering.Pulp and Paper Canada2009,
45вҖ“48.
(5) Wang, X. G.; Dumont, G. A.; Davies, M. S. Estimation in paper machine control.IEEE
Control Systems1993, 13, 34вҖ“43.
(6) Mijanovic, S. Paper machine cross-directional control near spatial domain boundaries.
Ph.D. thesis, university of british columbia, 2004.
(7) Wang,X.G.; Dumont,G.A.; Davies,M.S.Modellingandidentiп¬Ғcationsofbasisweight
variations in paper machines.IEEE Transactions on Control Systems Technology1993,
1, 230вҖ“237.
(8) Dumont, G. A.; Jonsson, I. M.; Davies, M. S.; Ordubadi, F. T.; Fu, Y.; Natarajan, K.;
Lindeborg, C.; Heaven, E. M. Estimation of moisture variations on paper machines.
IEEE transactions on control systems technology1993, 1, 101вҖ“113.
(9) Chu, D.; Gheorghe, C.; Backstrom, J.; Forbes, M.; Chu, S.Model predictive control and
optimization for papermaking processes; INTECH Open Access Publisher, 2011.
(10) Wang, X. G.; Dumont, G. A.; Davies, M. S. Adaptive basis weight control in paper
machines. Control Applications, 1993., Second IEEE Conference on. 1993; pp 209вҖ“216.
50
Page 51:
(11) Aslani, S.; Davies, M.; Dumont, G.; Stewart, G. Detecting Aliasing Between Cross and
Machine Direction Variations by Variable Sampling Rate.measurement 2009, 20, 1.
(12) HalouskovГЎ, A.; KГЎrn` y, M.; Nagy, I. Adaptive cross-direction control of paper basis
weight. Automatica 1993, 29, 425вҖ“429.
(13) Ohenoja, M. One-and two-dimensional control of paper machine: a literature review.
October 2009.
(14) Lang, D.; Fu, C. Variable Speed Scanning-A Fundamentally Better Way to Scan.O
Papel: revista mensal de tecnologia em celulose e papel2013, 74, 59вҖ“64.
(15) Measurement Systems and Product Variability.TAPPI, Paper Machine Quality Control
Systems (QCS)2005, 1.
(16) Heaven, E. M.; Jonsson, I. M.; Kean, T. M.; Manness, M. A.; Vyse, R. N. Recent
advances in cross machine proп¬Ғle control.IEEE Control Systems1994, 14, 35вҖ“46.
(17) Lu, Q.; Rippon, L. D.; Gopaluni, R. B.; Forbes, M. G.; Loewen, P. D.; Backstrom, J.;
Dumont, G. A. Cross-directional controller performance monitoring for paper machines.
American Control Conference (ACC), 2015. 2015; pp 4970вҖ“4975.
(18) Cutshall, K. The nature of paper variation.Tappi journal1990, 73, 81вҖ“90.
(19) Bialkowski, W. Newsprint Uniformity and Process Control The Untapped Competitive
Edge. CPPA Conference, Montreal, Canada. 1990.
(20) Stewart, G. E.; Gorinevsky, D. M.; Dumont, G. A. Feedback controller design for
a spatially distributed system: The paper machine problem. IEEE Transactions on
Control Systems Technology2003, 11, 612вҖ“628.
(21) Gendron, S. Fundamental Properties of Scanner Signals for the Correct Separation
of Paper Machine CD and MD Variations.PAPTAC 91st Annual Meeting2005, 1,
D297вҖ”D302.
51
Page 52:
(22) Lindeborg, C. A process model of moisture variations.Pulp & paper Canada1986, 87,
42вҖ“47.
(23) Nesic, Z.; Davies, M.; Dumont, G. Paper machine data compression using wavelets.
Control Applications, 1996., Proceedings of the 1996 IEEE International Conference
on. 1996; pp 161вҖ“166.
(24) Karimzadeh, S. Online detection of picketing and estimation of cross direction and ma-
chine direction variations using the discrete cosine transform. Ph.D. thesis, University
of British Columbia, 2008.
(25) Chen,S.-C.AnalysisofSheetVariationsвҖ“InsightsofTwo-DimensionalVariations. 2011,
990вҖ“1002.
(26) Chen, S. Determination of cd and/or md variations from scanning measurements of
a sheet of material. 2012; https://www.google.com/patents/US20120278032, US
Patent App. 13/457,870.
(27) Towп¬Ғghi, P. Estimating paper sheet process variations from scanned data using com-
pressive sensing. Ph.D. thesis, University of British Columbia, 2011.
(28) Duarte, M. F.; Eldar, Y. C. Structured compressed sensing: From theory to applica-
tions. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing2011, 59, 4053вҖ“4085.
(29) Skelton, J.; Wellstead, P.; Duncan, S. Distortion of web proп¬Ғles by scanned measure-
ments. Pulp & Paper Canada2003, 104, 81вҖ“84.
(30) CandГЁs, E. J.; Wakin, M. B. An introduction to compressive sampling.IEEE signal
processing magazine2008, 25, 21вҖ“30.
(31) Arfken, G. B.; Weber, H. J.Mathematical methods for physicists international student
edition; Academic press, 2005.
52
Page 53:
(32) Chatterjee,A.Anintroductiontotheproperorthogonaldecomposition. Current science
2000, 78, 808вҖ“817.
(33) CandГЁs, E. J., et al. Compressive sampling. Proceedings of the international congress
of mathematicians. 2006; pp 1433вҖ“1452.
(34) Han, L.; Han, L.; Li, Z. Inverse spectral decomposition with the SPGL1 algorithm.
Journal of Geophysics and Engineering2012, 9, 423.
(35) Ljung, L.System identiп¬Ғcation; Wiley Online Library, 1999.
(36) Featherstone, A. P.; Braatz, R. D. Control-oriented modeling of sheet and п¬Ғlm pro-
cesses. AIChE Journal1997, 43, 1989вҖ“2001.
(37) Forssell, U.; Ljung, L. Closed-loop identiп¬Ғcation revisited.Automatica 1999, 35, 1215вҖ“
1241.
(38) Gustavsson, I.; Ljung, L.; SГ¶derstrГ¶m, T. Identiп¬Ғcation of processes in closed
loopвҖ”identiп¬Ғability and accuracy aspects.Automatica 1977, 13, 59вҖ“75.
(39) Van den Hof, P. Closed-loop issues in system identiп¬Ғcation.Annual reviews in control
1998, 22, 173вҖ“186.
(40) Forssell, U.; Ljung, L. A projection method for closed-loop identiп¬Ғcation.IEEE Trans-
actions on Automatic Control2000, 45, 2101вҖ“2106.
(41) Chen, L. L. T. What can regularization oп¬Җer for estimation of dynamical systems?
IFAC Proceedings Volumes2013, 46, 1вҖ“8.
(42) Jelali, M. An overview of control performance assessment technology and industrial
applications. Control engineering practice2006, 14, 441вҖ“466.
(43) Harris, T. J. Assessment of control loop performance.The Canadian Journal of Chem-
ical Engineering1989, 67, 856вҖ“861.
53
Page 54:
(44) Botelho, V.; Trierweiler, J. O.; Farenzena, M.; Duraiski, R. Methodology for detecting
modelвҖ“plant mismatches aп¬Җecting model predictive control performance.Industrial &
Engineering Chemistry Research2015, 54, 12072вҖ“12085.
(45) Botelho, V.; Trierweiler, J. O.; Farenzena, M.; Duraiski, R. Perspectives and chal-
lenges in performance assessment of model predictive control.The Canadian Journal
of Chemical Engineering2016, 94, 1225вҖ“1241.
(46) Shah, S. L.; Patwardhan, R.; Huang, B. Multivariate controller performance analysis:
methods, applications and challenges. AICHE Symposium Series. 2002; pp 190вҖ“207.
(47) Badwe, A. S.; Gudi, R. D.; Patwardhan, R. S.; Shah, S. L.; Patwardhan, S. C. Detection
of model-plant mismatch in MPC applications.Journal of Process Control2009, 19,
1305вҖ“1313.
(48) Lu,Q.; Gopaluni,R.B.; Forbes,M.G.; Loewen,P.D.; BackstrГ¶m,J.U.; Dumont,G.A.
Model-Plant Mismatch Detection with Support Vector Machines.IFAC-PapersOnLine
2017, 50, 7993вҖ“7998.
(49) SchГ¶lkopf,B.; Platt,J.C.; Shawe-Taylor,J.; Smola,A.J.; Williamson,R.C.Estimating
the support of a high-dimensional distribution.Neural computation 2001, 13, 1443вҖ“
1471.
(50) Lu, Q. Adaptive model-predictive control and its applications in paper-making pro-
cesses. Ph.D. thesis, University of British Columbia, 2018.
(51) Zhu, Y. Multivariable process identiп¬Ғcation for MPC: the asymptotic method and its
applications. Journal of Process Control1998, 8, 101вҖ“115.
(52) Patwardhan, R. S.; Gopaluni, R. B. A moving horizon approach to input design for
closed loop identiп¬Ғcation.Journal of Process Control2014, 24, 188вҖ“202.
54
Page 55:
(53) Youseп¬Ғ, M.; Rippon, L.; Forbes, M.; Gopaluni, R.; Loewen, P.; Dumont, G.; Back-
strom, J. Moving-Horizon Predictive Input Design for Closed-Loop Identiп¬Ғcation.
IFAC-PapersOnLine2015, 48, 135вҖ“140.
Profile
Estimation
Adaptive
Control
Process
Monitoring
Model
Identification
 G
G
Figure 26: For table of contents only
55

==================================================
--- ABB 2sigma.pdf ---
Page 1:
Page 2:
Page 3:
Page 4:
Page 5:
Page 6:
Page 7:
Page 8:
Page 9:
Page 10:
Page 11:
Page 12:
Page 13:
Page 14:
Page 15:
Page 16:
Page 17:
Page 18:
Page 19:
Page 20:
Page 21:
Page 22:
Page 23:
Page 24:
Page 25:
Page 26:
Page 27:
Page 28:
Page 29:
Page 30:
Page 31:
Page 32:
Page 33:
Page 34:
Page 35:
Page 36:
Page 37:
Page 38:

==================================================
--- InTech-Model_predictive_control_and_optimization_for_papermaking_processes.pdf ---
Page 1:
15 
Model Predictive Control and Optimization  
for Papermaking Processes 
Danlei Chu, Michael Forbes, Johan BackstrГ¶m,  
Cristian Gheorghe and Stephen Chu 
Honeywell, 
Canada 
1. Introduction 
Papermaking is a large-scale two-dimensional process. It has to be monitored and controlled 
continuously in order to ensure that the qu alities of paper products stay within their 
specifications. There are two types of control problems involved in papermaking processes: 
machine directional (MD) control and cross di rectional (CD) control. Machine direction 
refers to the direction in which paper sheet trav els and cross direction refers to the direction 
perpendicular to machine direction. The object ives of MD control and CD control are to 
minimize the variation of the sheet quality measurements in machine direction and cross 
direction, respectively. This chapter consid ers the design and applications of model 
predictive control (MPC) for papermaking MD and CD processes.  
MPC, also known as moving horizon control (MHC), originated in the late seventies and has 
developed considerably in the past two decades (Bemporad and Morari 2004; Froisy 1994; 
Garcia et al. 1998; Morari & Lee 1999; Rawlings  1999; Chu 2006). It can explicitly incorporate 
the processвҖҷ physical constraints in the controller design and formulate the controller design 
problem into an optimization problem. MPC has become the most widely accepted advanced 
control scheme in industries. There are over  3000 commercial MPC implementations in 
different areas, including petro-chemicals, food processing, automotives, aerospace, and pulp 
and paper (Qin and Badgwell 2000; Qin and Badgwell 2003).  
Honeywell introduced MPC for MD controls in 1994; this is likely the first time MPC 
technology was applied to MD controls (Bac kstrГ¶m and Baker, 2008). Increasingly, paper 
producers are adopting MPC as a standard approach for advanced MD controls. 
MD control of paper machines requires regulation of a number of quality variables, such as 
paper dry weight, moisture, ash content, caliper, etc. All of these variables may be coupled 
to the process manipulated variables (MVвҖҷs), including thick stock flow, steam section 
pressures, filler flow, machine speed, and dist urbance variables (DVвҖҷs) such as slice lip 
adjustments, thick stock consistency, broke recycle, and others. Paper machine MD co ntrol 
is truly a multivariable control problem. 
In addition to regulation of the quality va riables during normal operation, a modern 
advanced control system for a paper mach ine may be expected to provide dynamic 
economic optimization on the machine to redu ce energy costs and eliminate waste of raw 
materials. For machines that produce more than one grade of paper, it is desired to have an 
automatic grade change feature that will crea te and track controlled variable (CV) and MV 
www.intechopen.com
Page 2:
 
Advanced Model Predictive Control 310 
trajectories to quickly and safely transfer pr oduction from one grade to the next. Basic MD-
MPC, economic optimization, and automatic grade change are discussed in this chapter. 
MPC for CD control was introduced by Hone ywell in 2001 (BackstrГ¶m et al. 2001). Today, 
MPC has become the trend of advanced CD control applications. Some successful MPC 
applications for CD control have been reported  in (BackstrГ¶m et al. 2001, BackstrГ¶m et al. 
2002; Chu 2010a; Gheorghe 2009). 
In papermaking processes, it is desired to control the CD profile of quality variables such as 
dry weight, moisture, thickness, etc. These properties are measured by scanning sensors that 
traverse back and forth across the paper sheet,  taking as many as 2000 or more samples per 
sheet property across the machine. There may be several scanners installed at different 
points along the paper machine and so there ma y be multiple CD profiles for each quality 
variable. 
The CD profiles are controlled using a number of  CD actuator arrays. These arrays span the 
paper machine width and may contain up to 300 individual actuators. Common CD 
actuators arrays allow for local adjustment, across the machine, of: slice lip opening, 
headbox dilution, rewet water sprays, and indu ction heating of the rolls. As with the CD 
measurements, there may be multiple CD actuator  arrays of each type available for control. 
By changing the setpoints of the individual CD actuators within an array, one can adjust the 
local profile of the CD measurements.  
The CD process is a multiple-input-multiple-ou tput (MIMO) system. It  shows strong input 
and output off-diagonal coupling properties. One CD actuator array can have impact on 
multiple downstream CD measurement profiles. Conversely, one CD measurement profile can 
be affected by multiple upstream CD actuat or arrays. Therefore, the CD control problem 
consists of attempting to minimize the vari ation of multiple CD measurement profiles by 
simultaneously optimizing the setpoints of all individual CD actuators (Duncan 1989). 
MPC is a natural choice for paper machine CD control because it can systematically handle 
the coupling between multiple actuator an d multiple measurement arrays, and also 
incorporate actuator physical constraints into the controller design. However, different from 
standard MPC problems, the most challenging part of the cross directional MPC (CD-MPC) 
is the size of the problem. The CD-MPC pr oblem can involve up to 600 MVs, 6000 CVs, and 
3000 hard constraints. Also, the new setpoints of MVs are required as often as every 10 to 20 
seconds. This chapter discusses the details of th e design for an efficient large-scale CD-MPC 
controller. 
This chapter has 5 sections. Section 2 provid es an overview of the papermaking process 
highlighting both the MD and CD aspects. Section 3 focuses on modelling, control and 
optimization for MD processes. Section 4 focuses on modelling, control and optimization fo r 
CD processes. Both Sections 3 and 4 give indu strial examples of MPC applications. Finally, 
Section 5 draws conclusions and provides some perspective on the future of MD-MPC and 
CD-MPC.  
2. Overview of papermaking processes 
A flat sheet of paper is a netw ork consisting of cellulose fi bres bound to one another. A 
paper machine transforms a slurry of water an d wood cellulose fibres into this type of 
network. The whole papermaking process can be  regarded as a water-removal system: the 
consistency of fibre solutions, called stock by papermakers, increases from around 1% at the 
beginning of a paper machine (the headbox) to around 95% at the end (the reel). 
www.intechopen.com
Page 3:
 
Model Predictive Control and Optimization for Papermaking Processes 
311 
2.1 Brief description of papermaking processes 
In general a paper machine can be divided into four sections: forming section, press section, 
drying section, and calendering section. In th e forming section, the stock flow enters the 
headbox to be distributed evenly across a continuously running fabric felt called the wire. 
The newly formed sheet is carried by the wire along the Fourdrinier table, which has a set of 
drainage elements that promote water remova l by various gravity and suction mechanisms. 
These elements include suction boxes, couch roll s, foils, etc. The solid consistency of the 
paper web can reach 20% by the time the web leaves the forming section and enters the 
press section. Figure 1 illustrates the configuration of a Fourdrinier-type paper machine.   
 
 
Fig. 1. The configuration of a Fourdrinier-type paper machine 
The press section may be considered as an ex tension of the water-removal process that was 
started on the wire in the forming section. Typi cally, it consists of 1 вҖ“ 3 rolling press nips. 
When the paper web passes through these nips , the pressing roll squeezes water out and 
consolidates the web formation at the same ti me. In the press section, both the surface 
smoothness and the web strength are improved. As  higher web strength is achieved in the 
press section, better runability will be observed in the drying section. A paper machine is 
typically operated at a very high speed. The fastest machine speed may be as high as 2,200 
meters per minute.  
The drying section includes multiple drying cylinders which are heated by high temperature 
and high pressure steam. The he at is transferred from steam onto the paper surface through 
these rotating steel cylinders. The heat flow increases the paper surface temperature to the 
point where water starts evaporating and escaping from the paper web. The drying section is 
the most energy consuming part of paper manufacturing. Before the paper enters the drying 
section, the solid consistency is around 50%. After the drying section, the consistency can reach 
95%, which corresponds to a finished product moisture specification.  
The last section of the paper machine is calle d the calendering section. Calendering is a 
terminology referring to pressing  with a roll. The surface and th e interior properties of the 
paper web are modified when it passes throug h one or more calendering nips. Typically the 
calendering nip consists of one or multiple so ft/hard or hard/hard roll pairs. The hard roll 
presses the paper web against the other roll, an d deforms the paper web plastically. By this 
means, the calender roll surface is replicated onto the paper web. Depending on the type of 
paper being produced, the primary objective of  calendering may be to produce a smooth 
paper surface (for printing), or to improve th e uniformity of CD prop erties, such as paper 
caliper (thickness).  
www.intechopen.com
Page 4:
 
Advanced Model Predictive Control 312 
More details of paper machine design and operation are given in (Smook 2002; Gavelin 
1998). 
2.2 Paper quality measurement 
A paper machine can have one or more me asurement scanners. The quality measurement 
sensors are mounted on the scanner head which travels back and forth across the paper web 
to provide online quality measurements. The most common paper machine quality 
measurements include dry weight, moisture, and caliper. Dry weight indicates the solid 
weight per unit area of a sheet of paper. Fo r different types of products, the value of dry 
weight can vary from 10 grams per square meter (gsm), in the case of paper tissue, to 400 
gsm, in the case of heavy paper board. Moisture  content is another critical quality property 
of the finished paper product. It indicates th e mass percentage of water contained in a sheet 
of paper. Moisture content is a key factor dete rmining the strength of the finished product. 
Typical moisture targets range from 5% to 9%. Caliper is the measure of the thickness of a 
sheet of paper. It is a key factor determin ing the gloss and printability of the finished 
product. The caliper targets are in the range from 70 	ЙҠm  to 300 ЙҠm  depending on the 
production grade. In general the online measur ements for dry weight, moisture and caliper 
are available and used for both the MD and CD feedback controller designs.
 
As the scanners travel across a moving sheet, th e real data collected actually comes from a 
zig-zag trajectory (See Figure 2). These data co ntain both CD and MD variation. A reliable 
MD/CD separation scheme is the prerequisite  for MD and CD control designs. Since the 
MD/CD separation is a separate topic, the re st of this chapter assumes that the pure 
MD/CD measurements have been obtained pr ior to the MD/CD controller development. 
The scanner measurements are denoted by x(i, t),  n  indexes the n measurements 
taken across the sheet each scan (CD measuremen t index), and t is the time stamp of each 
scan (MD measurement index). xаҙӨбҲәtбҲ»  is the MD measurement given by 
 x аҙӨ(t)=
1
n вҲ‘ x(i, t)n
i=1
. (1) 
 
 
Fig. 2. The zig-zag scanner trajectories 
www.intechopen.com
Page 5:
 
Model Predictive Control and Optimization for Papermaking Processes 
313 
2.3 Brief description of MD control 
The objective of MD control is to minimize th e variation of the sheet quality measurements 
in machine direction. 
A number of actuators are available for control of the MD variables. Stock flow to the headbox 
is regulated by the stock flow valve or variab le speed pump. As stock flow increases, the 
amount of fibre flowing into the forming section increases and dry weight and caliper increase. 
At the same time, there is also more water coming through the machine and moisture wil l 
increase. So, ch anges in the stock flow affect dry we ight, moisture and caliper. The steam 
pressure in the cylinders of the drying section may be adjusted. As the steam pressure in the 
cylinders increases, so does the temperature in the cylinders, and more heat is transferred to 
t h e  p a p e r .  I n  t h i s  w a y ,  s t e a m  p r e s s u r e  a f f e c ts moisture. Typically, the dryer cylinders are 
divided into groups, and the steam pressure for each of these dryer sections may be adjusted 
independently. Machine speed affects dry weight and caliper, as increasing the machine speed 
stretches the paper web thinner, giving it less mass per unit area. Machine speed also affects 
moisture as both the drying properties of the paper and the residence time in the dryer change. 
Clearly, paper machine MD control is a multivariable control problem. 
2.4 Brief description of CD control 
The objective of CD control is to achieve unifor m paper qualities in the cross direction, i.e., 
to minimize the variation of CD profiles. The CD variation, can be formulated as two times 
of the standard deviation of the CD profile, 
 2 ПғCD(t)=2* бүҖ
1
n-1
вҲ‘ (x(i, t)-xаҙӨ(t))
2n
i=1 бүҒ
1
2
  (2) 
Often the term вҖҳCD spreadвҖҷ is used interchangeably with 2Пғ CD.  
CD actuators are used to regulate CD profile s and improve the uniformity of paper quality 
properties in the cross direction i.e., reduce the value of 2ПғCD.  
The most common dry weight CD actuators ar e both located at the headbox. The headbox 
slice opening is a full-width orifice or nozzle th at can be adjusted at points across the width 
of the paper machine. This allo ws for differences in the local stock flow onto the wire across 
the machine. The consistency profiler changes the consistency of local stock flow by injecting 
dilution water and altering the local concen tration of pulp fibre across the headbox. 
Headbox slice and consistency profiler are primarily designed for dry weight control, but 
they have the effects on both moisture and calip er profiles. Figure 1 indicates the location of 
headbox dry weight actuators.  
The most common moisture actuators are th e steam box and water spray. The steam box 
applies high temperature steam to the surface of the moving paper web. As the latent heat in 
the steam is released and heats up the paper web, it lowers the web viscosity and eases 
dewatering in the press section. The water spray regulates the moisture profiles according to 
a different mechanism. It deploys a fine wate r spray to the paper surface through a set of 
nozzles across the machine width to re-moistur ize the paper web. Similar to the dry weight 
actuators, moisture actuators are designed for moisture profile regulation but they may have 
effects on the caliper profile. The steam box is typically installed in the press section and the 
water spray is located in the drying section. Figure 1 indicates the physical locations of 
moisture actuators.  
The most common caliper actuators are hot air showers and induction heaters. Both types of 
actuators provide surface heating for calendering rolls. The hot shower uses the high 
www.intechopen.com
Page 6:
 
Advanced Model Predictive Control 314 
temperature steam or air; the induction heater uses the high frequency alternating current. 
By heating up the calender roll, caliper actuators alter the local diameter of the calender roll 
and subsequently increase the local pressure applied to the paper web. The physical location 
of the caliper actuators can be also found in Figure 1.  
3. Modelling, control and optimization of papermaking MD processes 
Control of the MD process is typically a regulation problem where the paper quality 
variables need to be held within specified qu ality limits. At the same time, the constant 
pressure to increase operational efficiency de mands that the paper production uses the least 
amount of raw materials and energy required to meet quality goals.  
When multiple grades of paper are produced on  a single paper machine, control must also 
be able to provide quick transitions of the qu ality variables along smooth trajectories. When 
the differences between the paper grades are large, it may be necessary to enhance the 
control algorithm to account for process nonlinea rities that become apparent over a larger 
span of operating points. 
3.1 Modeling of papermaking MD processes 
In this section, modelling of the MD process for MPC controller design is discussed. The 
additional modelling required for paper grade change control is discussed in section 3.4.  
For effective MPC control of pape r MD quality variables, it is necessary to build a matrix of 
linear models relating the process MVвҖҷs to th e quality variables (the CVвҖҷs). A basic paper 
machine model matrix most often includes st ock flow, steam pressure of multiple dryer 
sections, and machine speed as MVs, and paper weight (basis weight or dry weight), and 
moisture as CVвҖҷs. Many other MVвҖҷs and CV вҖҷs can be included in the model matrix 
depending on the complexity of the paper ma chine and the paper quality requirements. An 
example model matrix is given in Figure 3. 
 
 
Fig. 3. A basic model matrix for CD-MPC. The models are step responses. 
www.intechopen.com
Page 7:
 
Model Predictive Control and Optimization for Papermaking Processes 
315 
The process models used for MPC control are often developed in transfer function form, 
such as: 
 yбҲәsбҲ»	= g(s)u(s)+d(s)  (3) 
and 
 y(s)= бүҺ
yа¬ө бҲәsбҲ»
Ъӯ
yаӯ’ аұҜ бҲәsбҲ»
бүҸ ,			gбҲәsбҲ» = бүҺ
gа¬өа¬ө бҲәsбҲ» вҖҰ g а¬өаӯ’ аұ« бҲәsбҲ»
Ъӯ
gаӯ’ аұҜ а¬ө бҲәsбҲ» вҖҰ g аӯ’ аұҜ аӯ’ аұ« бҲәsбҲ»
бүҸ,  u(s)=бүҺ
uа¬ө бҲәsбҲ»
Ъӯ
uаӯ’ аұ« бҲәsбҲ»
бүҸ, (4) 
where yбҲәsбҲ» вҲҲ в„Ӯ аӯ’ аұҜ  is the Laplace transformation of the Nаӯ· 	 MD quality measurements (such as 
dry weight, moisture, caliper, etc). uбҲәsбҲ» вҲҲ в„Ӯ аӯ’ аұ«  is the Laplace transformation of the actuator 
setpoints (such as thick stock flow, dryer section steam pressure(s), filler flows, ma chine 
speed, etc). d(s) 	вҲҲ в„Ӯ аӯ’ аұҜ  is the Laplace transformation of  the augmented process disturbance 
array.  gаӯ§аӯЁбҲәsбҲ» вҲҲ в„Ӯ  (i	 = Ні вҖҰ N аӯ· 	and	j	 = Ні вҖҰ N аӯі бҲ» are the transfer functions from the j th actuator uаӯЁ 
to the ith MD quality measurement 	yаӯ§.  
3.1.1 Model identification 
Typically the MD process models that are used  as the basis for the MD-MPC controller are 
identified from data obtained during simple process experiments. A se ries of step changes 
is made for each MV. There is a delay after each step long enough so that the full 
responses of all of CVвҖҷs can be observed. That is, the CV responses rea ch steady state 
before the next step change in the MV is made. These types of process experiments  are 
known as bump tests. 
Once a set of identification data has been obtained, various techniques may be used to 
generate a process model from this data. In th e simplest case, plots of the bump tests are 
reviewed to graphically estimate a process gain, ЭҮаҜңаҜқ , dead time, Ь¶аҜ— аі”аі• , and time constant, Ь¶аҜЈ аі”аі• , 
yielding the process model: 
 Э•аҜңбҲ» =
аҜһ аі”аі• аҜҳ
а°·аі… аіҸ аі”аі• аіһ
а¬өа¬ҫаҜҚ аіӣ аі”аі• аҜҰ
Э‘аҜқбҲ»  (5) 
More complex methods involve use of regression  and search techniques to find both the 
optimum model parameters, and the optimum model structure (transfer function numerator 
and denominator orders). These techniques typically use minimization of squared model 
prediction errors as the objective: 
 Э•а°ӘЭ•аҜңбҲ»аөҜ
а¬¶аҜҮ
аҜһаӯҖа¬ө  (6) 
Where Э•а°ӘбҲ» and Э•аҜңбҲ» are respectively the predicte d and actual values of the i th CV at time 
k. (Ljung 1998) is the classic reference on sy stem identification, and there are commercial 
software packages available that automate much of the system identification work. 
3.2 MD-MPC design 
Once all of the bump test, and system identifi cation activities have been performed, the 
complete process model (3) is used directly in the model predictive controller. MPC solves 
an optimization problem at each control execution. One robust MPC problem formulation is: 
www.intechopen.com
Page 8:
 
Advanced Model Predictive Control 316 
 minаӯјаӯі,аӯ· аұЁ
а¬ө
а¬¶
вҖ–WбҲәyаӯ° вҲ’S Иҹ uбҲ»вҖ–а¬¶
а¬¶ , (7) 
Subject to: 
Э•аҜҹЭ•аӯ°Э•аӯҰ  
Э‘аӯӘ аө‘uаө‘u аҜӣ  
Э‘аҜҹ аө‘вҲҶ uаө‘вҲҶ u аҜӣ  
The values of Э•аҜҘ  are the CV targets and S О” U are the predicted future values of the CVвҖҷs. S is 
the prediction matrix, containing all the info rmation from the process model (3). W is a 
weighting matrix, and вҖ–вҲҷвҖ–а¬¶
а¬¶  is the two-norm squared operator. Э•аҜҹ	and Э•аӯҰ  are the low and high 
CV quality limits, Э‘аӯӘ and uаҜӣ  are the low and high MV limits, and Э‘аҜҹ and вҲҶuаҜӣ  are the low 
and high limits for MV moves. As discussed in the section below, this problem formulation, 
combined with techniques employed in its solution implicitly provide robustness 
characteristics in the controller design.  
The technical details of the solution of the problem (7) are given in (Ward 1996); however, 
some notable aspects of the solution method ology and beneficial characteristics of the 
solution are given in the section below. 
3.2.1 Model scaling and controller robustness 
Robust numerical solution of the optimization problem (7) depends on condition number of 
the system gain matrix, G. Prior to perfor ming the controller design, the gain matrix 
condition number is minimized by solving the problem: 
 minаӯҲ аұЁ, аӯҲ аұҷ {ЙҲ бҲәDаӯ° gDаӯЎ бҲ»}, (8) 
Where ЙҲ  is condition number, and D r and D c are diagonal transformation matrices. The 
scaled system gain matrix gs is then: 
 gаӯұ =D аӯ° gDаӯЎ , (9) 
gаӯұ  is then used for all MPC computations. 
It should be noted that the objective (7) does not explicitly penalize the MV moves О”u as a 
method to promote controller robustness. Instead, controller robustness is provided  by the 
CV range formulation and singular value thresholding.  
First, the CV range formulation refers to the inequalities given in the problem formulation 
(7). Under this formulation, if a CV is predicted to be within it range in the future, no MV 
action is taken. Since MV moves are not made unless absolutely necessary, this is a very 
robust policy. 
Second, the solution of the problem involves  an active set method that allows the 
constrained optimization problem to be conver ted into an unconstrained problem. A URV 
orthogonal decomposition (see Ward 1996) of th e matrix characterizing the unconstrained 
problem is then employed to solve the uncons trained problem. Prior to the decomposition, 
singular values of the problem matrix that ar e less than a certain threshold are dropped, 
reducing the dimension of the problem, and ensu ring that the controller does not attempt to 
control weakly controllable directions of the process. 
www.intechopen.com
Page 9:
 
Model Predictive Control and Optimization for Papermaking Processes 
317 
3.3 Economic optimization 
Energy consumption is a big concern for paperm akers. Increasing profits by minimizing 
operating costs without sacrificing paper quality and runability is always a goal for them. In 
theory, if the number of MVs of a process is  greater than the number of CVs plus the 
number of active constraints, the process has degrees of freedom allowing for steady-state 
optimization. Product value optimization can be systematically integrated with the MD-
MPC control. One can then take the feed, prod uct, and utility costs into account with the 
MD controller design.  
For the economic optimization of a process, the following objective is to be minimized: 
 ЬҪаҜ¬ аі”Э•аҜңЭ•аҜңа¬ҙ бҲ»а¬¶ЬҫаҜ¬ аі”Э•аҜңаөҜаҜңЬҪаҜЁ аі•Э‘аҜқЭ‘аҜқа¬ҙ аөҜ
а¬¶
ЬҫаҜЁ аі•Э‘аҜқ бүҒаҜқ  (10) 
Here Э•аҜңа¬ҙ  and Э‘аҜқа¬ҙ  are the desired steady state values of the process CVвҖҷs and MVвҖҷs, ЬҪаҜ¬ аі” and 
ЬҪаҜЁ аі•  are the costs of quadratic deviation from the desired values, and ЬҫаҜ¬ аі” and ЬҫаҜЁ аі•  are the 
linear costs of the CVвҖҷs and MVвҖҷs. This objectiv e is useful for paper machines, for example, 
by placing costs on the different energy sources used in drying. 
The economic objective is combined with th e MPC control problem objective to give an 
augmented problem formulation. The augmented problem is then solved using the same 
solution method as described above. 
Economic optimization is a lower priority for paper machines than quality control. If the 
paper does not meet quality specifications, it cannot be sold, and any savings made from 
economic optimization are more than lost. Therefore, economic opti mization only occurs 
when there are extra degrees of freedom for the controller. Economic optimization is not 
attempted unless all of the CVвҖҷs are predicted to  remain within their quality specifications 
over the whole of the controllerвҖҷs prediction horizon.  
3.3.1 Mill implementation results  
MPC including an economic optimization layer was implemented for a tissue machine. A 
diagram of the tissue machine is given in Figure 4. As can be seen in the diagram, tissue dry 
weight and moisture are measured at the reel; moisture is measured between the second 
through-air dryer (TAD2) and the Yankee dryer,  and TAD1 exhaust pressure must also be 
monitored and controlled. These four variables are the CVвҖҷs in this example. A large number 
of MVвҖҷs are available to control this machin e. Stock flow, TAD1 supply temperature, TAD1 
dry end differential pressure, TAD1 gap pre ssure, TAD2 exhaust temperature, TAD2 dry 
end differential pressure, TAD2 gap pressu re, Yankee hood temperature, and Yankee 
supply fan speed are all used as MVвҖҷs in the MPC. Machine speed and tickler refiner were 
added as DVвҖҷs. The MPC model matrix is shown in Figure 5. 
 
 
Table 1. Tissue machine MVвҖҷs with linear objective coefficients  
MV Energy Fuel Units
Linear Obj Coef
Cost /  eng unit
TAD1 Supply Temp Gas deg F 0.680
TAD1 DE DP Electricity inch H2O 47.267
TAD1 Gap Pres Electricity inch H2O -0.030
TAD2 Exh Temp Gas deg F 5.858
TAD2 DE DP Electricity inch H2O 40.249
TAD2 Gap Pres Electricity inch H2O -16.415
www.intechopen.com
Page 10:
 
Advanced Model Predictive Control 318 
A large number of the MVвҖҷs in this control problem have an impact on the paper moisture, 
both after TAD2, and at the reel; however each  MV uses a different energy source and has 
different drying efficiency. Overall, since th ere are more MVвҖҷs than CVвҖҷs, and significant 
cost differences between the MVвҖҷs, there is an opportunity for economic optimization in this 
system. Table 1 shows the energy sources and di fferent energy cost efficiencies (Linear Obj 
Coeff Cost/eng unit) associated with each MV. Economic optimization can be accomplished 
by including these variables in the linear part  of the economic objective function given by 
(10). 
 
 
Fig. 4. Diagram of a tissue machine with CVвҖҷs, MVвҖҷs, and DVвҖҷs for MPC. 
Once the economic cost function was added to the MPC, a plant trial was made. Figures 6-10 
show the results of this trial. In Figure 7 it ca n be seen that prior to turning on the economic 
optimizer (the period from 8:30 to 9:30) ther e was a relative cost of energy of 100. The 
optimizer was turned on at 9:30. Initially th ere were some wind-up problems in the plant 
DCS which were preventing the MPC from optimi zing. Once these were cleared, at 10:44, 
the controller drove the process to the low co st operating point (from 10:44 to 12:30). The 
relative cost of energy at this operating poin t was 98.8. In order to better interpret these 
results, it is necessary to rank the costs of each MV on the common basis of Cost/% Moi. 
This is accomplished by dividing the linear obje ctive coefficients given in Table 1 by their 
respective process gains. These are shown in  Table 2, along with the MV high and low 
limits, and the optimization behaviour. Looking ag ain at the Figures 8 and 9, it can be seen 
www.intechopen.com
Page 11:
 
Model Predictive Control and Optimization for Papermaking Processes 
319 
that the highest costing MVвҖҷs are driven to their minimum operating points, and the lowest 
costing MVвҖҷs are driven to their maximum op erating points. The TAD1 dry end differential 
pressure is left as the MV that is within limits and actively controlling the paper moistures. 
Figure 10 shows that throughout this trial,  the MVвҖҷs are optimized without causing any 
disturbance to the CVвҖҷs. 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 5. The MPC model matrix for the tissue machine control and optimization example  
 
 
 
 
Fig. 6. Natural gas costs and electricity costs during the trial  
Stock 
Flow
TAD1 
Supply 
Temp
TAD1 DE 
DP
TAD1 
Gap Pres
TAD2 Exh 
Temp
TAD2 DE 
DP
TAD2 
Gap Pres
Yankee 
Hood 
Temp
Yankee 
Supply 
Fan 
Speed
Machine 
Speed
Stock 
Flow
TAD1 
Gap 
Pressure
Tickler 
Refiner
Dry Weight
Reel 
Moisture
TAD 
Moisture
TAD1 
Exhaust 
Pressure
www.intechopen.com
Page 12:
 
Advanced Model Predictive Control 320 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 7. Total costs during the trial  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 2. The MV cost rankings.  
MV eng unit Low Limit High Limit
Linear Obj 
Coef 
(Cost/eng unit)
Process
Gain 
(%Moi/eng unit)
Cost
(Cost / % 
Moi) Rank
Optimization
Behavior
TAD1 Supply Temp deg F 300.0 450.0 0.68 -0.12 5.48 4 450 (max)
TAD1 DE DP inch H2O 1.0 3.9 47.30 -5.12 9.24 3 controlling Moi
TAD1 Gap Prs inch H2O 0.4 1.5 -0.03 1.95 0.02 6 0.4 (max)
TAD2 Exh Temp deg F 175.0 250.0 5.86 -0.45 13.02 1 175 (min)
TAD2 DE DP inch H2O 1.0 3.5 40.26 -3.14 12.82 2 1 (min)
TAD2 Gap Prs inch H2O 0.2 1.5 -16.40 4.25 3.86 5 0.2 (max)
www.intechopen.com
Page 13:
 
Model Predictive Control and Optimization for Papermaking Processes 
321 
 
Fig. 8. Manipulated variables during the trial  
 
 
Fig. 9. Manipulated variables during the trial  
www.intechopen.com
Page 14:
 
Advanced Model Predictive Control 322 
 
Fig. 10. Controlled variables during the trial  
3.4 Grade change strategies 
Grade change is a terminology in MD control. It refers to the process of transitioning a paper 
machine from producing one grade of paper pr oduct to another. One can achieve a grade 
change by gradually ramping up a set of MV s to drive the setpoints of CVs from one 
operating point to another. During a grad e change, the paper product is often off-
specification and not sellable. It is important to develop an automatic control scheme to  
coordinate the MV trajectories and minimize the grade change transi tion times and the off-
spec product. An offline model predictive controller can be designed to produce CV and 
MV trajectories to meet these grade change criteria. MPC is well-suited to this problem 
because it explicitly considers MV and CV trajec tories over a finite horizon. By coordinating 
the offline grade change controller (linear or  nonlinear) and an online MD-MPC, one can 
derive a fast grade change that minimizes o ff-spec production. This section discusses the 
design of MPC controllers for linear and nonlinear grade changes. 
Figure 11 gives a block diagram of the grade change controller incorporated into an MD 
control system. The grade change controller calc ulates the MV and CV trajectories to meet 
the grade change criteria. This occurs as a separate MPC calculation performed offline so 
that grade change specific process models can be used, and so that the MPC weightings can 
be adjusted until the MV and CV trajectories meet the design criteria. The MV trajectories 
are sent to the regulatory loop as a series of  MV setpoint changes. The CV trajectories are 
sent as setpoint changes to the MD controller. If the grade change is performed with the MD 
controller in closed-loop, additional corrections  to the MV setpoints are made to eliminate 
any deviation of the CV from its target trajectory. 
Controlled Variables
11.6
11.7
11.8
11.9
12
12.1
12.2
12.3
12.4
12.5
12.6
12.7
8:34:07
8:40:34
8:47:01
8:53:28
8:59:55
9:06:22
9:12:49
9:19:16
9:25:43
9:32:10
9:38:37
9:45:04
9:51:31
9:57:58
10:04:25
10:10:52
10:17:19
10:23:46
10:30:13
10:36:40
10:43:07
10:49:34
10:56:01
11:02:28
11:08:55
11:15:22
11:21:49
11:28:16
11:34:43
11:41:10
11:47:37
11:54:04
12:00:31
12:06:58
12:13:25
12:19:52
Time
DW (lb/ream)
0
5
10
15
20
25
Moisture (%)
ReelDwt PV ReelMoi PV ExpressMoi PV
www.intechopen.com
Page 15:
 
Model Predictive Control and Optimization for Papermaking Processes 
323 
 
Fig. 11. Block diagram of MD-MPC control enhanced with grade change capability  
The MV and CV trajectories are generated in a two step procedure. First there is a target 
calculation step that generates the MV setpoint s required to bring the CVвҖҷs to their target 
values for the new grade. Once the MV setpoint s are generated, then there is a trajectory 
generation step where the MV and CV trajectories  are designed to meet the specifications of 
the grade change. 
The MV targets are generated from solving a set of nonlinear equations: 
 
()
()
()
()
11
dw dw 1 2 3 1 2 3
22
dw dw 1 2 3 1 2 3
11
moi moi 1 2 3 1 2 3
22
moi moi 1 2 3 1 2 3
y f u ,u ,u , ,C ,C ,C , 0,
y f u ,u ,u , ,C ,C ,C , 0,
y f u ,u ,u , ,C ,C ,C , 0,
y f u ,u ,u , ,C ,C ,C , 0,
вҲ’вҖҰ вҖҰ =
вҲ’вҖҰ вҖҰ =
вҲ’вҖҰ вҖҰ =
вҲ’вҖҰ вҖҰ =
пҒҚ
пҒҚ
  (11) 
Here y dw/ymoi represents the CV target for the new grade. The functions fбҲәвҲҷбҲ» are the 
models of dry weight and moisture. The process MVвҖҷs are denoted u i and model constants 
are denoted C i. The superscripts indicate the same pa per properties measured by different 
scanners. Since the number of MVвҖҷs and the numb er of CVвҖҷs is not necessarily equal, these 
equations may have one, multiple or no solutions. To allow for all of these cases, the 
problem is recast as: 
 minаӯі аұҹFбҲәuа¬ө ,u а¬¶ ,вҖҰ бҲ», (12) 
Subject to: 
GбҲәuа¬ө ,u а¬¶ ,вҖҰ бҲ» аө‘НІ ,  
HбҲәuа¬ө ,u а¬¶ ,вҖҰ бҲ» =НІ ,  
 
Grade Change 
Controller 
Process
Scanner 
R1
R2
MD - MPC 
OperatorOperator 
u1,OP 
u2,OP y2 
y1 uC1,SP u1,SP
О”u1,GC
u2,SPuC2,SP
y1,SP 
y1,SP y 2,SP 
y2,SP 
User Input
www.intechopen.com
Page 16:
 
Advanced Model Predictive Control 324 
Where FбҲәвҲҷбҲ» is a quadratic objective function formulated to find the minimum travel solution. 
HбҲәвҲҷбҲ» represents the equality constraints given above, and GбҲәвҲҷбҲ» represents the physical 
limitations of the CVs and MVs (high, low, and rate of change limits).   
Once the MV targets have been generated, th e MV and CV trajectories are then designed. 
Figure 12 gives a schematic representation of the trajectory generation algorithm. T he 
process models are linearized (if necessar y) and then scaled and normalized for 
application in an MPC controller. Process constraints such as the MV  and CV targets, and 
the MV high and low limits are also given to the MPC controller. Internal controller 
tuning parameters are then used to adjust th e MV and CV trajectories to meet the grade 
change requirements.  
 
 
Fig. 12. Diagram of MPC-based grade change trajectory generation.  
3.4.1 Linear grade change 
In a linear grade change, the MD  process models that are us ed in the MD-MPC controller 
are also used as the models for determining the MD targets, and for designing the MD grade 
change trajectories.  
3.4.2 Nonlinear grade change 
In a nonlinear grade change, a first principl es model may be used for the target and 
trajectory generation. For example, a simple dry weight model is: 
 mаӯўаӯ°аӯ· =K
аӯҜ аұ©аұӘаұҘаұҷаұЎ
аӯҙ
, (13) 
 
MPC Module 
Linearization Nonlinear Model 
MPC Controller Process Model
Scaling & 
Normalization 
Grade Change Constraints 
вҖў  MV physical limits 
вҖў  MV and CV targets 
вҖў  Customized Weights 
CV Target 
CV Trajectories 
MV Trajectories 
www.intechopen.com
Page 17:
 
Model Predictive Control and Optimization for Papermaking Processes 
325 
Where mаӯўаӯ°аӯ·  is the paper dry weight, qаӯұаӯІаӯӯаӯЎаӯ©  is the thick stock flow, and v is machine speed. K 
is the expression of a number  of process constants and values including fibre retention, 
consistency, and fibre density. (Chu et al. 2008) gives a more detailed treatment of this dry 
weight model.  
(Persson 1998, SlГӨtteke 2006, and Wilhelmsson 1995) are examples of first principles 
moisture models that may be used. 
3.4.3 Mill implementation results 
In this section, some results of MPC-based grade changes for a fine paper machine are given. 
The grade change is from a paper with a dry weight of 53 lb/3000ft
2 (86 g/m 2) to a paper 
with a dry weight of 44 lb/3000ft 2 (72 g/m2). Both paper grades have the same reel moisture 
setpoint of 4.8%. For the grade change, stock flow, 6 th section steam pressure, and machine 
speed are manipulated. 
Figures 13 and 14 show a grade change perf ormed on the paper machine using linear 
process models, and keeping the regular MPC in  closed-loop during the grade change. The 
grade change was completed in 10 minutes, whic h is a significant improvement over the 22 
minutes required by the grade change package of the plantвҖҷs previous control system. In 
Figure 13, the CV trajectories are shown. Here it  can be seen that although there is initially a 
small gap between the actual dry weight and the planned trajectory, the regular MPC takes 
action with the thick stock valve (as shown in Figure 14) to quickly bring dry weight back on 
target. The deviation in the reel moisture is m o r e  o b v i o u s .  T h i s  m i g h t  b e  e x p e c t e d  a s  t h e  
moisture dynamics of the paper machine display more nonlinear behaviour for this range of 
operations. The steam trajectory in Figure 14 is ramping up at its maximum rate and yet the 
paper still becomes too wet during the initial pa rt of the grade change. This indicates that 
the grade change package is aggressively push ing the system to achieve short grade change 
times. 
 
 
Fig. 13. CV trajectories under closed-loop GC with linear models 
www.intechopen.com
Page 18:
 
Advanced Model Predictive Control 326 
 
Fig. 14. MV trajectories under closed-loop GC with linear models 
Figures 15 and 16 show a grade change performed on a high fidelity simulation of the fine 
paper machine. This grade change uses a non linear process model, and the regular MPC is 
k e p t  i n  c l o s e d - l o o p  d u r i n g  t h e  g r a d e  c h a n g e .  H e r e  i t  c a n  b e s e e n  t h a t  t h e  d u r a t i o n  o f  t h e  
grade change is reduced to 8 minutes. Part of the improvement comes from using stock flow 
setpoint instead of stock valve position, allo wing improved dry weight control. Another 
improvement is that the planned trajectories a llow for some deviation in the reel moisture 
that cannot be eliminated. Both dry weight and reel moisture follow their trajectories more 
closely. At the end of the grade change, the nonlinear grade change package is able to 
anticipate the need to reduce steam preventing the sheet from becoming dry.  
 
 
Fig. 15. CV trajectories under closed-loop GC with nonlinear models 
www.intechopen.com
Page 19:
 
Model Predictive Control and Optimization for Papermaking Processes 
327 
 
Fig. 16. MV trajectories under closed-loop GC with nonlinear models 
4. Modelling, control and optimization of papermaking CD processes 
To produce quality paper it is not enough that  the average value of paper weight, moisture, 
caliper, etc across the width of the sheet rema ins on target. Paper properties must be 
uniform across the sheet. This is the purpose of CD control.  
4.1 Modelling of papermaking CD processes 
The papermaking CD process is a large scaled two-dimensional process. It involves multiple 
actuator arrays and multiple quality measur ement arrays. The process shows very strong 
input-output off-diagonal coupling properties. An accurate CD model is the prerequisite for 
an effective CD-MPC controller. We begin by discussing a model structure for the CD 
process and the details of the model identification.  
4.1.1 A two-dimensional linear system 
The CD process can be modelled as a linear multiple actuator arrays and multiple 
measurement arrays system,  
  YбҲәsбҲ»	= G(s)U(s)+D(s),  (14) 
and 
 Y(s)= бүҺ
y
а¬ө бҲәsбҲ»
Ъӯ
yаӯ’ аұҜ бҲәsбҲ»
бүҸ ,			GбҲәsбҲ» = бүҺ
Gа¬өа¬ө бҲәsбҲ» вҖҰ G а¬өаӯ’ аұ« бҲәsбҲ»
Ъӯ
Gаӯ’ аұҜ а¬ө бҲәsбҲ» вҖҰ G аӯ’ аұҜ аӯ’ аұ« бҲәsбҲ»
бүҸ,  U(s)=бүҺ
uа¬ө бҲәsбҲ»
Ъӯ
uаӯ’ аұ« бҲәsбҲ»
бүҸ, (15) 
www.intechopen.com
Page 20:
 
Advanced Model Predictive Control 328 
where YбҲәsбҲ» вҲҲ в„Ӯ бҲәаӯ’ аұҜ вӢ…аӯ«бҲ»  is the Laplace transformation of the augmented CD measurement 
array. The element yаӯ§бҲәsбҲ» вҲҲ в„Ӯ аӯ« 	бҲәi	 = Ні, вҖҰ , N аӯ· бҲ» is the Laplace transformation of the i th 
individual CD measurement profile, such as dry weight, moisture, or caliper. Nаӯ· 	is the total 
number of the quality measurements, and m is  the number of elem ents of individual 
measurement arrays. UбҲәsбҲ» вҲҲ в„Ӯ бҲәвҲ‘ аӯ¬ аұ 
аұҠ аұ«
аұ а°ёа°ӯ бҲ» is the Laplace transformation of the augmented 
actuator setpoint array. The element uаӯЁбҲәsбҲ» вҲҲ в„Ӯ аӯ¬ аұ 	бҲәj	 = Ні вҖҰ N аӯі бҲ» is the Laplace transformation of 
the jth individual CD actuator setpoint profile, such as the headbox slice, water spray, steam 
box, or induction heater. Nаӯі 	is the total number of actuator beams available as MVвҖҷs, and nаӯЁ 
is the number of individual zones of the jth actuator beam. In genera l a CD system has the 
same number of elements for all CD meas urement profiles, but different numbers of 
actuator beam setpoints. D(s) 	вҲҲ в„Ӯ бҲәаӯ’ аұҜ вӢ…аӯ«бҲ»  is the Laplace transfor mation of the augmented 
process disturbance array. It represents process output disturbances.   
Gаӯ§аӯЁбҲәsбҲ» вҲҲ в„Ӯ аӯ«Г—аӯ¬ аұ  ( i	 = Ні вҖҰ N аӯ· 	and	j	 = Ні вҖҰ N аӯі бҲ» in (15) is the transfer matrix of the sub-system 
from the j th actuator beam uаӯЁ to the i th CD quality measurement 	yаӯ§. The model of this sub-
system can be represented by a spatial static matrix Pаӯ§аӯЁ вҲҲв„қ аӯ«Г—аӯ¬ аұ  with a temporal dynamic 
transfer function 	hаӯ§аӯЁбҲәsбҲ» . In practice, 	hаӯ§аӯЁбҲәsбҲ»  is simplified as a first-order plus dead time 
system. Therefore, Gаӯ§аӯЁбҲәsбҲ»  is given by 
 Gаӯ§аӯЁбҲәsбҲ» = P аӯ§аӯЁhаӯ§аӯЁбҲәsбҲ» = P аӯ§аӯЁ
а¬ө
а¬өа¬ҫаӯҳ аұҰ аӯұ
eа¬ҝаӯҳ аұҡ аӯұ   (16) 
where Tаӯ®  is the time constant and Tаӯў  is the time delay. The static spatial matrix Pаӯ§аӯЁ is a matrix 
with nаӯЁ columns, i.e., Pаӯ§аӯЁ = [pа¬ө pа¬¶p аӯ¬ аұ ] and its kth column pаӯ©  represents the spatial 
response of the k th individual actuator zone of the j th actuator beam. As proposed in 
(Gorinevsky & Gheorghe 2003), pаӯ© 	can be formulated by, 
 
22
kk
22
ЗӮ ((x x ) ЗғПү ) ЗӮ ((x x ) ЗғПү )
k ПүПү kk
g ПҖПҖp{ e c os( ( (x x ) ЗғПү )) В ec os( ((x x ) ЗғПү ))}2 ПүПү
вҲ’вҲ’ вҲ’+вҲ’вҲ’
=вҲ’ вҲ’ + вҲ’ +   (17) 
where x is the coordinate of CD measurem ents (CD bins), g is the process gain, Йҳ  is the 
response width, ИҪ  is the attenuation and Иҫ  is divergence. xаӯ©  is the CD alignment that 
indicates the spatial relationship  between the centre of the k th individual CD actuator and 
the center of the corresponding measurement responses. A fuzzy function may be used t o 
model the CD alignment. Refer to (Gorinevsky & Gheorghe 2003) for the technical details.  
Figure 17 illustrates the structure of the spatial response matrix Pаӯ§аӯЁ. The colour map on the 
left shows the band-di agonal property of 	Pаӯ§аӯЁ; and the plot in the right shows the spatial 
response of the individual spatial actuator pаӯ© . It can  b e se e n  th at each  in divi du al actu a tor 
affects not only its own spatial zone area, but also adjacent zone areas. 
4.1.2 Model identification 
Model identification of the papermaking CD process is the proced ure to determine the 
values of the parameters in (16, 17), i.e., the dynamic model parameters 	Оёаӯҳ ={ Tаӯ® ,Tаӯў }, the 
spatial model parameters ОёаӯҮаӯҲ =	{ g ,Йҳ ,ИҪ ,Иҫ } , and the alignment xаӯ© . An iterative identification 
algorithm has been proposed in (Gorinev sky & Gheorghe 2003). As with MD model 
identification, this algorithm is  an open-loop model identifica tion approach. Identification 
experiment data are first collected by performing open-loop bump tests.  
www.intechopen.com
Page 21:
 
Model Predictive Control and Optimization for Papermaking Processes 
329 
 
Fig. 17. The illustration to spatial response matrix Pаӯ§аӯЁ. 
Figure 18 illustrates the logic flow of this algorithm. This nontrivial system identification 
approach first estimates the overall dyna mic response and spatial response, and 
subsequently identifies the dynamic model parameter Оё
аӯҳ  and the spatial model 
parameter	ОёаӯҮаӯҲ . hа·   in Figure 18 is the estimated finite impulse response (FIR) of the dynamic 
model hбҲәsбҲ»  in (16). p а·ң in Figure 18 is the estimated steady state measurement profile, i.e., 
overall spatial response. For easier notation , we omit the indexes i and j here. The key 
concept of the algorithm is to optimize th e model parameters iteratively. Refer to 
(Gorinevsky & Gheorghe 2003) for technical details of this algorithm, and (Gorinevsky & 
Heaven, 2001) for the theoretical proof of the algorithm convergence.  
 
 
Fig. 18. The schematic of the iterative CD system identification algorithm 
The algorithm described above has been im plemented in a software package, named 
IntelliMap
TM, which has been widely used in pulp and paper industries. The tool executes 
the open-loop bump tests automa tically and, at the end of the experiments, provides a 
continuous-time transfer matrix model (def ined in (14)). For convenience, the MPC 
controller design discussed in the next sectio n will use the state space model representation. 
Conversion of the continuous-time transfer ma trix model into the discrete-time state space 
model is trivial (Chen 1999) and is omitted here.  
www.intechopen.com
Page 22:
 
Advanced Model Predictive Control 330 
4.2 CD-MPC design 
In this section, a state space realization of (14) is used for the MPC controller development, 
 XбҲәk + НібҲ»	 = 	AXбҲәkбҲ» + BИҹUбҲәkбҲ»
YбҲәkбҲ» = 	CXбҲәkбҲ» + DбҲәkбҲ» . (18) 
XбҲәkбҲ» вҲҲ в„қ бҲәа¬¶вӢ…аӯ’ аұҜ вӢ…аӯ«бҲ» , YбҲәkбҲ» вҲҲ в„қ бҲәаӯ’ аұҜ вӢ…аӯ«бҲ» , ИҹUбҲәkбҲ» вҲҲ в„қ бҲәвҲ‘ аӯ¬ аұ 
аұҠ аұ«
аұ а°ёа°ӯ бҲ»,		andDбҲәkбҲ» вҲҲ в„қ бҲәаӯ’ аұҜ вӢ…аӯ«бҲ» 	are the augmented 
state, output, actuator move, and output disturbance arrays of the papermaking CD process 
with multiple CD actuator beams and multiple quality measurement arrays. {A, B, C} are the 
model matrices with compatible dimensions. Assume (A, B) is controllable and (A , C) is 
observable. In this section, the objective function of CD-MPC is developed first. Then the CD 
actuator constraints are incorporated in the objective function. Finally a fast QP solver is 
presented for solving the large scale constrained CD-MPC optimization problem. How to 
tune a CD-MPC controller is also covered in this section 
4.2.1 Objective function of CD-MPC  
The first step of MPC development is perfor ming the system output  prediction over a 
certain length of prediction horizon. From the state space model defined in (18), we can 
predict the future states, 
 аЈӘаӯ…аЈӘаӯҶбҲәkбҲ» , (19) 
where бҲәkбҲ» вҲҲ в„қ бҲәа¬¶вӢ…аӯ’ аұҜ вӢ…аӯ«вӢ…аӯҢ аұҰ бҲ» is the state prediction, бҲәkбҲ» вҲҲ в„қ бҲәаӯҢ аұ«вӢ… вҲ‘ аӯ¬ аұ 
аұҠ аұ«
аұ а°ёа°ӯ бҲ» is the augmented 
actuator moves. аЈӘаӯ…  and аЈӘаӯҶ  are the state and input prediction  matrices with the compatible 
dimensions. Hаӯ® 	and Hаӯі  are the output and input prediction horizons, respectively.  
The explicit expressions of the parameters in (19) are 
 
pp up
2
AB
H1 HHHp
u
A B0X(k 1|k)
AB 0X(k 2|k) A
(k) , В В  , В В  ,
X(k H |k) AB A BA
О”U(k|k)
О”U(k 1|k)and О” (k)
О”U(k H 1|k)
вҲ’вҲ’
пғ©пғ№
пғ© пғ№+пғ©пғ№ пғӘпғә пғӘ пғәпғӘпғә + пғӘпғә пғӘ пғәпғӘпғә== =пғӘпғә пғӘ пғәпғӘпғә пғӘпғә пғӘ пғәпғӘпғә + пғӘпғә пғӘ пғәпғӘпғә
пғ«пғ»
пғ« пғ»пғ«пғ»
пғ©пғ№
пғӘпғә +пғӘпғә= пғӘпғә
пғӘпғә +вҲ’пғ«пғ»
пҒҢ
пҒҢ
пҒҚпҒҸ пҒҚпҒҚ пҒҚ
пҒҢ
пҒҚ
пҒҳпҒҗ пҒҗ
пҒ•
  (20) 
The initial state Xа·Ў а¬ҙ бҲәk|k вҲ’ НібҲ»  at instant k can be estimated from the previous state estimation 
Xа·Ў бҲәk вҲ’ НібҲ»  and the previous actuator move		ИҹUбҲәk вҲ’ НібҲ» , i.e.,  
 Xа·Ў а¬ҙ бҲәk|k вҲ’ НібҲ»	 = AX а·Ў бҲәk вҲ’ НібҲ» + BИҹUбҲәk вҲ’ НібҲ» . (21) 
The measurement information at instant k can be used to improve the estimation, 
 Xа·Ў бҲәkбҲ»	 = X а·Ў а¬ҙ бҲәk|k вҲ’ НібҲ» + LбҲә YбҲәkбҲ» 	 вҲ’ 	CXа·Ў а¬ҙ бҲәk|k вҲ’ НібҲ»бҲ»,  (22) 
where LвҲҲв„қ бҲәа¬¶вӢ…аӯ’ аұҜ вӢ…аӯ«бҲ»Г—бҲәаӯ’ аұҜ вӢ…аӯ«бҲ»  is the state observer matrix.  
Replace the state XбҲәkбҲ»  by its estimation Xа·Ў бҲәkбҲ» , and perform the output prediction бҲәkбҲ» , 
www.intechopen.com
Page 23:
 
Model Predictive Control and Optimization for Papermaking Processes 
331 
 аЈӘаӯЎаЈӘаӯ…аЈӘаӯЎаЈӘаӯҶбҲәkбҲ» , (23) 
where аЈӘаӯЎ вҲҲв„қ бҲәаӯ’ аұҜ вӢ…аӯ«вӢ…аӯҢ аұҰ бҲ»Г—бҲәа¬¶вӢ…аӯ’ аұҜ вӢ…аӯ«вӢ…аӯҢ аұҰ бҲ» is the output prediction matrix, given by  
 аЈӘаӯЎC бҲ»=аөҰ
НІ
НІ
Ъӯ
C
бҲәkбҲ» = аөҰ
YбҲәk + Ні|kбҲ»
YбҲәk + Нҙ|kбҲ»
Ъӯ
YбҲәk + H аӯ® |kбҲ»
аөӘ. (24) 
From the expression in (24), one can define the objective function of a CD-MPC problem, 
 minбҲәаӯ©бҲ»аЈіаӯІаӯҘаӯІ ||аЈ«а°ӯ
а¬¶бҲә k бҲ» | |аЈ«а°®
а¬¶аЈҜаӯІаӯҘаӯІ ||аЈ«а°Ҝ
а¬¶ +| | в„ұаӯ бҲәkбҲ»||аЈ«а°°
а¬¶ . (25) 
аЈіаӯІаӯҘаӯІ 	=	[ Y аӯІаӯҘаӯІ
аӯҳ ,Y аӯІаӯҘаӯІ
аӯҳY аӯІаӯҘаӯІ
аӯҳ ]аӯҳ  defines the measurement target s over the prediction horizon Hаӯ® . 
Similarly, аЈҜаӯІаӯҘаӯІ =[ U аӯІаӯҘаӯІ
аӯҳ ,U аӯІаӯҘаӯІ
аӯҳU аӯІаӯҘаӯІ
аӯҳ ]аӯҳ  defines the input actuator setpoint targets over the 
control horizon Hаӯі . аЈ«а¬өаЈ«а¬¶аЈ«а¬·аЈ«а¬ё бҲ»	are the diagonal weighting matrices. аЈ«а¬ө  defines the 
relative importance of the individual quality measurements. аЈ«а¬¶ 	defines the relative 
aggressiveness of the individual CD actuators. аЈ«а¬· 	defines the relative deviation from the 
targets of the indivi dual CD actuators. аЈ«а¬ё 	defines the relative picketing penalty of the 
individual CD actu ators. The matrix в„ұаӯ  	= 	 d i a g бҲә Fаӯ F аӯ  ) is the augmented actuator 
bending matrix. The detailed definition of Fаӯ   will be covered in Section 4.2.2. || вҲҷ ||в„ӣаі”
а¬¶  is the 
square of weighted 2-norm, i.e., || вҲҷ ||в„ӣаі”
а¬¶ = бҲәвҲҷбҲ» аҜҚ в„ӣаҜңбҲәвҲҷбҲ».  In general, аЈ«а¬өаЈ«а¬¶аЈ«а¬·аЈ«а¬ё бҲ»	are used as the 
tuning parameters for CD-MPC. 
бҲәkбҲ»  is the future input prediction. It can be expressed by  
 бҲәkбҲ» = аөҰ
UбҲәk|kбҲ»
UбҲәk + Ні|kбҲ»
Ъӯ
UбҲәk + H аӯіа¬ҝа¬ө бҲ»|kбҲ»
аөӘ =аөҰ
I
I
Ъӯ
I
аөӘ
аё”
аЈӯаӯҚ
UбҲәk вҲ’ НібҲ» +аөҰ
НІ
НІ
Ъӯ
II I I
аөӘ
бҮЈ
бҮ§ бҮ§ бҮ§ бҮ§ бҮӨ бҮ§ бҮ§ бҮ§ бҮ§ бҮҘ
аЈӯаӯ®
бҲәkбҲ» , (26) 
where IвҲҲв„қ бҲәвҲ‘ аӯ¬ аұ 
аұҠ аұ«
аұ а°ёа°ӯ бҲ»Г—бҲә вҲ‘ аӯ¬ аұ бҲ»аұҠ аұ«
аұ а°ёа°ӯ  is the identity matrix. Insertin g (26) into (25) and replacing бҲәkбҲ»  
by бҲәkбҲ» , the QP problem can be recast into 
 minбҲәаӯ©бҲ»
а¬ө
а¬¶
аЈҜаӯҳбҲәkбҲ» + ПҶ аӯҳбҲәkбҲ»,  (27) 
where ОҰ is the Hessian matrix and ПҶ is the gradient matrix. Bo th can be derived from the 
prediction matrices (аЈӘаӯ…аЈӘаӯҶаЈӘаӯҮ бҲ» and weighting matrices (аЈ«а¬өаЈ«а¬¶аЈ«а¬·аЈ«а¬ё бҲ».	 Refer to (Fan 2003) 
for the detailed expressions of ОҰ and ПҶ. 
By solving the QP problem in (27), one can derive the predicted optimal array бҲәkбҲ» . Only 
the first component of бҲәkбҲ» , i.e., ИҹUбҲәkбҲ»,  is sent to the real process and the rest are rejected. 
By repetition of this procedure, the optimal MV moves at any instant are derived for 
unconstrained CD-MPC problems.  
4.2.2 Constraints 
In Section 4.2.1 the CD-MPC controller is form ulated as an unconstrained QP problem. In 
practice the new actuator setpoints given by the CD-MPC controller in (27) should always 
respect the actuatorвҖҷs physical limits. In  other words, the hard constraints on бҲәkбҲ»  should 
be added into the problem in (27).  
www.intechopen.com
Page 24:
 
Advanced Model Predictive Control 332 
The CD actuator constraints include: 
вҖў  First and second order bend limits; 
вҖў  Average actuator setpoint maintenance; 
вҖў  Maximum actuator setpoints; 
вҖў  Minimum actuator setpoints; and  
вҖў  Maximum change of actuator setpoints between consecutive CD-MPC iterations.  
Of these five types of actuator constraints, most of them are very common for the typical MPC 
controllers, except for the bend limits which ar e special for papermaking CD processes. The 
first and second bend limits define the allowable first and second order difference between the 
adjacent actuator setpoints of the actuator beam. It typically applies to slice lips and induction 
heaters to prevent the actuator beams from being overly bent or locally over-heated. The 
bending matrix of the jth actuator beam, ЬЁаҜ•,аҜқ  (N аӯі бҲ»	can be defined by  
 вҲ’
ЫҸ
ЫҺ
ЫҺ
ЫҺ
ЫҺ
ЫҚЙҒ а¬ө,аӯЁ
ЙҒ а¬¶,аӯЁ
Ъӯ
ЙҒ а¬¶,аӯЁ
ЙҒ а¬ө,аӯЁЫ’
Ы‘
Ы‘
Ы‘
Ы‘
Ыҗ
аё–
ЙҖ аӯ ,аӯЁ
аө‘
ЫҸ
ЫҺ
ЫҺ
ЫҺ
ЫҺ
ЫҚНІ
НІ
НІ
Ъӯ
НІ . 5 вҲ’ Ні НІ
Ы’
Ы‘
Ы‘
Ы‘
Ы‘
Ыҗ
бҮЈ бҮ§ бҮ§ бҮ§ бҮ§ бҮ§ бҮ§ бҮ§ бҮ§ бҮ§ бҮӨ бҮ§ бҮ§ бҮ§ бҮ§ бҮ§ бҮ§ бҮ§ бҮ§ бҮ§ бҮҘ
Fаӯ ,аӯЁ
ЫҸ
ЫҺ
ЫҺ
ЫҺ
ЫҚ
uа¬ө,аӯЁ
uа¬¶,аӯЁ
Ъӯ
uаӯ¬ аұ а¬ҝа¬ө,аӯЁ
uаӯ¬ аұ ,аӯЁЫ’
Ы‘
Ы‘
Ы‘
Ыҗ
бҮЈ бҮ§ бҮӨ бҮ§ бҮҘ
uаӯЁ
аө‘
ЫҸ
ЫҺ
ЫҺ
ЫҺ
ЫҺ
ЫҚЙҒ а¬ө,аӯЁ
ЙҒ а¬¶,аӯЁ
Ъӯ
ЙҒ а¬¶,аӯЁ
ЙҒ а¬ө,аӯЁЫ’
Ы‘
Ы‘
Ы‘
Ы‘
Ыҗ
аё–
ЙҖ аӯ ,аӯЁ
, (28) 
where ЙҒ а¬ө,аӯЁ  and ЙҒ а¬¶,аӯЁ  are the first order and the second order bend limit of the j th actuator beam 
uаӯЁ. ЙҖ аӯ   andЬЁаҜ•,аҜқ  define the bend limit vector and the bend limit matrix of the j th actuator uаӯЁ, 
respectively. The bend limit matrix ЬЁаҜ•,аҜқ  is not only part of the constraints, but also the 
objective function in (27). In (27),	в„ұаӯ  	= 	 d i a g бҲә Fаӯ F аӯ  бҲ»and Fаӯ  	= 	 d i a g бҲә Fаӯ ,а¬өF аӯ ,аӯ’ аұ« ).  
The individual bend limit constraint on the j th actuator beam uаӯЁ in (28) can be extended to 
the overall bend limit matrix Fаӯ   for the augmented actuator setpoint array U, i.e.,  
 аөӨ Fаӯ 
вҲ’Fаӯ 
аөЁU аө‘ бүӮ ЙҖ аӯ 
ЙҖ аӯ 
бүғ (29) 
where ЙҖ аӯ   is the overall bend limit vector, and ЙҖ аӯ  =[ ЙҖ аӯ ,а¬ө
аӯҳЙҖ аӯ ,аӯ’ аұ«
аӯҳ ]аӯҳ .   
Similar to the bend limits, other types of actuat or physical constraints can be formulated as 
the matrix inequalities,   
 
ЫҸ
ЫҺ
ЫҺ
ЫҺ
ЫҺ
ЫҚFаӯ«аӯҹаӯ¶
вҲ’Fаӯ«аӯ§аӯ¬
FаӯҹаӯҙаӯҘ
вҲ’FаӯҹаӯҙаӯҘ
FвҲҶаӯҷ
вҲ’FвҲҶаӯҷЫ’
Ы‘
Ы‘
Ы‘
Ы‘
Ыҗ
Uаө‘
ЫҸ
ЫҺ
ЫҺ
ЫҺ
ЫҺ
ЫҚ
ЙҖ аӯ«аӯҹаӯ¶
ЙҖ аӯ«аӯ§аӯ¬
ЙҖ аӯҹаӯҙаӯҘ
ЙҖ аӯҹаӯҙаӯҘ
ЙҖ вҲҶаӯҷ
ЙҖ вҲҶаӯҷЫ’
Ы‘
Ы‘
Ы‘
Ы‘
Ыҗ
30) 
where the subscripts вҖңmax вҖқ, вҖңminвҖқ, вҖңavgвҖқ, and вҖң вҲҶU" stand for the maximum, minimum, 
average limit, and maximum setpoint changes between two consecutive CD-MPC iterations 
of the augmented actuator setpoint array, U. It  is straightforward to derive the expressions 
of Fаӯ«аӯҹаӯ¶ , Fаӯ«аӯ§аӯ¬ , FаӯҹаӯҙаӯҘ , FвҲҶаҜҺ . Therefore the detailed discussion is omitted.  
From (29) and (30), one can see that the cons traints on the augmente d actuator setpoint 
array U can be represented by a linear matrix inequality, i.e., 
 FU аө‘ ЙҖ,  (31) 
www.intechopen.com
Page 25:
 
Model Predictive Control and Optimization for Papermaking Processes 
333 
where F and ЙҖ  are constant coefficients used to combine the inequalities in  (29) and (30) 
together. 
(26) is inserted into (31). The constraint in (31)  is then added to the objective function in (27). 
Finally the CD-MPC controller is formulated as a constrained QP problem, 
 subject	to,
min
бҲәаӯ©бҲ»
а¬ө
а¬¶
аЈҜаӯҳбҲәkбҲ» + П• аӯҳбҲәkбҲ»
аЈӯаӯҚаЈӯаӯ®бҲәkбҲ»бҲ» аө‘ Иһ
, (32) 
where F бҲ» and ЙҖ бҲ» . By solving the QP problem in (32), the 
optimal actuator move at instant k can be achieved. 
4.2.3 CD-MPC tuning 
Figure 19 illustrates the implem entation of the CD-MPC controller. First, the process model 
is identified offline from inpu t/output process data. Then th e CD-MPC tuning algorithm is 
executed to generate optimal tuning paramete rs. Subsequently these tuning parameters are 
deployed to the CD-MPC controller. The contro ller generates the optimal actuator setpoints 
continuously based on the feedback measurements.  
 
 
Fig. 19. The implementation of the CD-MPC controller  
The objective for CD-MPC tuning algorithm in Figure 19 is to determine the values 
ofаЈ«
а¬өаЈ«а¬¶аЈ«а¬·аЈ«а¬ё  i n  ( 2 5 ) .  I t  h a s  b e e n  p r o v e n  t h a tаЈ«а¬ө 	defines the relative importance of 
quality measurements,аЈ«а¬¶  defines the dynamic characteristics of the closed-loop CD-MPC 
system, andаЈ«а¬· 	andаЈ«а¬ё 	define the spatial frequency characteristics of the closed-loop CD-
MPC system.аЈ«а¬· 	is for the high spatial frequency behaviours and аЈ«а¬ё 	is for the low spatial 
frequencies (Fan 2004).  
Strictly speaking, the CD-MPC tuning problem requires analyzing the robust stability of a 
closed-loop control system with nonlinear opti mization. An analytic solution to the QP 
www.intechopen.com
Page 26:
 
Advanced Model Predictive Control 334 
problem in (32) is the prerequisite for the CD-MPC tuning algorithm. However, in practice it 
is very challenging; almost impossible to derive the explicit solution to  (32) due to the large 
size of CD-MPC problems. A novel two-dimensio nal loop shaping approach is proposed in 
(Fan 2004) to overcome limitations for large scaled MPC systems. The algorithm consists of 
four steps: 
Step 1. Ignore the inequality constraint in (32) su ch that the closed-loop system given by 
(27) is linear. 
Step 2. Compute the closed-loop transfer function  of the unconstrained CD-MPC system 
given by (27). 
Step 3. By performing two-dimensional loop shapin g, optimize the weighting matrices to 
get the best trade off between the perfor mance and robustness of the unconstrained 
CD-MPC system. 
Step 4. Finally, re-introduce the constraint in (32) for implementation.  
Figure 20 shows the closed-loop diagram of  the unconstrained CD-MPC system with 
unstructured model uncertainties. The derivation of the pre-filtering matrix K
аӯ°  and feedback 
controller K is standard and can be found in (Fan 2003).  
 
 
Fig. 20. Closed-loop diagram of unconstrained CD-MPC system with unstructured model 
uncertainties 
From the small gain theory (K halil 2001), the linear closed-loo p system in Figure 20 is 
robustly stable if the closed-loop in (32) is nominally stable and,  
 ||G
аӯіаӯў бҲәzбҲ» бҮһ аӯӢ бҲәzбҲ»|| а®¶ аөҸНівҮҗПғ аҙҘбҲәG аӯіаӯў бҲәeаӯЁа®© бҲ»бҲ» аөҸ
а¬ө
а®ўаҙҘ бҲәбҮһ аұғ бҲәаӯЈ аұ аІЎ бҲ»бҲ» ,вҲҖ Йҳ . (33) 
Here Gаӯіаӯў бҲәzбҲ»  is the control sensitivity function which defines the linear transfer function from 
the output disturbance D(k) to the actuator setpoint U(k),  
 Gаӯіаӯў бҲәzбҲ» = KбҲәzбҲ»[I вҲ’ GбҲәzбҲ»KбҲәzбҲ»] а¬ҝа¬ө . (34) 
The sensitivity function of the system in Figure  20 defines the linear transfer function from 
the output disturbance D(k) to the output Y(k), 
Gаӯ·аӯў бҲәzбҲ» = [I вҲ’ GбҲәzбҲ»KбҲәzбҲ»] а¬ҝа¬ө . 
By properly choosing th e weighting matrices аЈ«а¬ө  toаЈ«а¬ё , both the control sensitivity function 
Gаӯіаӯў бҲәzбҲ»  and the sensitivity function Gаӯ·аӯў бҲәzбҲ»  can be guaranteed stable, and also the small gain 
condition in (33) can be satisfied. The tw o-dimensional loop shaping approach uses Gаӯіаӯў бҲәzбҲ»  
and Gаӯ·аӯў бҲәzбҲ»  to analyze the behaviour of the closed-loop system in Figure 20.  
It has been shown that both Gаӯіаӯў бҲәzбҲ»  and Gаӯ·аӯў бҲәzбҲ»  can be approximated as rectangular circulant 
matrices. One important property of circulant matrixes is that  the circulant matrix can be 
www.intechopen.com
Page 27:
 
Model Predictive Control and Optimization for Papermaking Processes 
335 
block-diagonalized by left- and right-multiplying Fourier matrices. Fourier matrices 
multiplication is equivalent to performing the standard discrete Fourier transformation . 
Therefore, the two-dimensional frequency representation of Gаӯіаӯў бҲәzбҲ»  and Gаӯ·аӯў бҲәzбҲ»  can be 
obtained by, 
 g а·ңаӯіаӯў бҲәЙӢ, e аӯЁа®© бҲ»=F аӯ¬ Gаӯіаӯў бҲәeаӯЁа®© бҲ»Fаӯ«аӯҢ , and		g а·ңаӯ·аӯў бҲәЙӢ, e аӯЁа®© бҲ»=F аӯ« Gаӯ·аӯў бҲәeаӯЁа®© бҲ»F аӯ«аӯҢ , (35) 
where ЙӢ  represents the spatial frequency. Fаӯ«  and Fаӯ¬  are m-points and n-points Fourier 
matrices, respectively. The detailed definitions of Fourier matrices can be found in (Fan 
2004). The two-dimensional frequent representation g а·ңаӯіаӯў бҲәЙӢ, e аӯЁа®© бҲ» and g а·ңаӯ·аӯў бҲәЙӢ, e аӯЁа®© бҲ» are block 
diagonal matrices. The singular values of g а·ңаӯіаӯў бҲәЙӢ, e аӯЁа®© бҲ» and g а·ңаӯ·аӯў бҲәЙӢ, e аӯЁа®© бҲ» are directly linked to 
the spatial frequencies.  
Instead of tune g а·ңаӯіаӯў бҲәЙӢ, e аӯЁа®© бҲ» and g а·ңаӯ·аӯў бҲәЙӢ, e аӯЁа®© бҲ» in full ЙӢ	and	Йҳ  frequency ranges, two dimensional 
loop shaping approach decouples the spatial tuning and dynamic tuning by firstly tu ning 
the controller at zero spatial frequency, i.e., setting ЙӢ=НІ , and then tuning the controller at 
zero dynamic frequency, i.e., setting Йҳ=НІ . The theoretical proof of this strategy can be 
founded in (Fan 2004).  
From spatial tuning, the value of the weighting matricesаЈ«а¬·аЈ«а¬ё  can be determined, and 
from the dynamic tuning, the value of аЈ«а¬¶  are determined. аЈ«а¬ө , as mentioned above, defines 
the relative importance of quality measurements and its value is defined by a CD-MPC user.  
In practice, the pr ocess gain matrix Pаӯ§аӯЁ in (16) is ill-conditioned. Similar to MD-MPC tuning, 
the scaling matrices have to be applied before tuning the controller. A scaling approach  
discussed in (Lu 1996) is used by CD-MPC to  reduce the condition number of the gain 
matrices.   
4.2.4 Fast QP solver 
The technical challenge of the CD-MPC optimization is how to solve the problem in (32) 
efficiently and accurately. The typical scanning rate of the paper machine is 10 - 30 seconds.  
Also considering the time cost of software implementation and data acquisition, the 
computation time of the problem in (32) is typically limited to 5 to 10 seconds.  
Different optimization techniques have been developed to solve QP problems efficiently, 
such as the active set method, interior point method, QR factorization, etc. This section 
presents a fast QP solver, called QPSchur, which is specifically designed to solve a large 
scaled CD-MPC problem. QPSchur is a dual space algorithm, wher e an unconstrained 
optimal solution is found first and violated constraints are added un til the solution is 
feasible (Bartlett 2002).  
LetвҖҷs consider the Lagrangian of the constrained QP in (32) 
 ЙүбҲ» =
а¬ө
а¬¶
аЈҜаӯҳбҲәkбҲ» + П• аӯҳбҲәkбҲ» + Йү аӯҳ бҲәЙҢ аӯҳбҲәkбҲ» вҲ’ Й—бҲ»,  (36) 
where ЙҢ= аЈӯаӯ®аӯҳ 	в„ұаӯҳ  and аЈӯаӯҚUбҲәk вҲ’ НібҲ».  In (36), бҲәkбҲ»  is called the primary variable and 
Йүаө‘НІ  is called as the dual variable (also known as the Lagrangian variable).  
At the starting point, QPSchur ignores all the constraints in (32) and solves unconstrained 
QP problem. This is equivalent to set the dual variable Йү=НІ . By this means, the initial 
optimal solution аЈҜвҲ—бҲәkбҲ»  is determined,  
 аЈҜвҲ—бҲәkбҲ» 	 = вҲ’ОҰ а¬ҝа¬ө П•. (37) 
www.intechopen.com
Page 28:
 
Advanced Model Predictive Control 336 
If аЈҜвҲ—бҲәkбҲ»  satisfies all the inequality constraints, i.e., ЙҢаӯҳаЈҜвҲ—бҲәkбҲ» аө‘ Й— , then аЈҜвҲ—бҲәkбҲ»  is the 
optimal solution, i.e. аЈҜаӯӯаЈҜвҲ—бҲәkбҲ» . The first elements of ИҹU аӯӯ бҲәkбҲ»  are sent to the real 
process, and the CD-MPC optimization stops the search iteration.  
If аЈҜвҲ—бҲәkбҲ»  violates one or more of the inequality constraints in (32), all the violation 
inequalities are noted, such that  
 ЙҢаӯұаӯіаӯ 
аӯҳаЈҜвҲ—бҲәkбҲ» аө’ Й— аӯұаӯіаӯ  , (38) 
where бҲәЙҢ аӯұаӯіаӯ 
аӯҳ , Й— аӯұаӯіаӯ  бҲ» is the violating subset of the inequality constraints in (32), and called the 
active set matrix and the active  set vector, respectively. The La grangian in (36) is redefined 
by using бҲәЙҢ аӯұаӯіаӯ 
аӯҳ , Й— аӯұаӯіаӯ  бҲ». The Karush-Kuhn-Tucker (KKT) condition of the updated Lagrangian 
is,  
 бүҲ ОҰЙҢ аӯұаӯіаӯ 
ЙҢаӯұаӯіаӯ 
аӯҳ Оһ
бҲәkбҲ»
Йү аӯұаӯіаӯ 
аөЁ=аөӨ вҲ’П•
Й— аӯұаӯіаӯ 
аөЁ, (39) 
Here Оһ=НІ  for the first searching iteration. Since ОҰ is non-singular (refer to Fan 2003), the 
problem in (39) can be solved by using Gaussian elimination. The Schur complement of the 
block Оһ is given by 
 	аҘә = Оһ вҲ’ 	 ЙҢ аӯұаӯіаӯ 
аӯҳ ОҰа¬ҝа¬ө ЙҢаӯұаӯіаӯ  . (40) 
The Schur complement theorem guarantees that аҘә  is non-singular if the Hessian matrix ОҰ is 
non-singular. From аҘә , (39) can be solved by 
 
Йү аӯұаӯіаӯ  =аҘә а¬ҝа¬ө бҲәЙ— аӯұаӯіаӯ  +ЙҢ аӯұаӯіаӯ 
аӯҳ ОҰа¬ҝа¬ө П•бҲ»
=аҘә а¬ҝа¬ө бҲәЙ— аӯұаӯіаӯ  +ЙҢ аӯұаӯіаӯ 
аӯҳаЈҜвҲ—бҲәkбҲ»бҲ»
бҲәkбҲ» = 	 ОҰ а¬ҝа¬ө бҲәвҲ’П• вҲ’ ЙҢ аӯұаӯіаӯ  Йү аӯұаӯіаӯ  бҲ»
 . (41) 
The inequality constraints in (32) are re-evalu ated, and the new active constraints (violated 
constraints) and the positive dual variables inequalities are added into the subset pair бҲәЙҢ аӯұаӯіаӯ 
аӯҳ , 
Й— аӯұаӯіаӯ  бҲ». The KKT condition of (39) is updated to derive  
 бүҲ ОҰЙҢ бҲҳаӯұаӯіаӯ 
ЙҢбҲҳаӯұаӯіаӯ 
аӯҳбҲәkбҲ»
Йүа·  аӯұаӯіаӯ 
аөЁ=аөӨ вҲ’П•
Й—а·Ў аӯұаӯіаӯ 
аөЁ, (42) 
where  
 ЙҢбҲҳаӯұаӯіаӯ  =[ ЙҢ аӯұаӯіаӯ  ,ЙҢ аӯ¬аӯЈаӯө ], 	Оһа·Ў =аөӨ ОһПҒ
ПҒаӯҳ Й– аөЁ,Йүа·  аӯұаӯіаӯ  =аөӨ Йү аӯұаӯіаӯ 
Йү аӯ¬аӯЈаӯө
аөЁ,a n d 	 Й—а·Ў аӯұаӯіаӯ  =аөӨ Й— аӯұаӯіаӯ 
Й— аӯ¬аӯЈаӯө
аөЁ. (43) 
In the same fashion, the Schur complement of the block Оһа·  can be represented by, 
 
	аҘәа·Ў =Оһа·  вҲ’	ЙҢбҲҳаӯұаӯіаӯ 
аӯҳ ОҰа¬ҝа¬ө ЙҢбҲҳаӯұаӯіаӯ 
=аөӨ ОһПҒ
ПҒаӯҳ Й– аөЁвҲ’бүҲ ЙҢаӯұаӯіаӯ 
аӯҳ
ЙҢаӯ¬аӯЈаӯөаӯҳ бүүОҰ а¬ҝа¬ө [ЙҢаӯұаӯіаӯ  ,ЙҢ аӯ¬аӯЈаӯө ]
=бүҲ аҘәПҒ вҲ’ ЙҢаӯұаӯіаӯ 
аӯҳ ОҰа¬ҝа¬ө ЙҢаӯ¬аӯЈаӯө
ПҒаӯҳ вҲ’ЙҢ аӯ¬аӯЈаӯө ОҰа¬ҝа¬ө ЙҢаӯұаӯіаӯ 
аӯҳ Й–вҲ’ЙҢ аӯ¬аӯЈаӯөаӯҳ ОҰа¬ҝа¬ө ЙҢаӯ¬аӯЈаӯө
бүү
 . (44) 
www.intechopen.com
Page 29:
 
Model Predictive Control and Optimization for Papermaking Processes 
337 
From (44), the new Schur complement аҘәа·Ў  can be easily derived from аҘә . The Schur 
complement update requires only multiplication with ОҰа¬ҝа¬ө  that is calculated in the initial 
search step and stored for reuse. This feature makes the SchurQP much faster than a 
standard QP solver. Removing the non-active  constraints (zero dual variables) of each 
search step is achieved easily: the columns of the Schur complement аҘәа·Ў  corresponding to the 
non-active constraints is removed before pursuing the next search iteration.    
At the current search iteration, if all the inequality constraints in (32) and the sign of dual 
variables are satisfied, the solution to (42) will be the final optimal solution of the CD-MPC 
controller, i.e., 
 	Йүа·Ў аӯұаӯіаӯ  =аҘәа·Ў а¬ҝа¬ө бҲәЙ—а·Ў аӯұаӯіаӯ  +ЙҢбҲҳаӯұаӯіаӯ 
аӯҳаЈҜвҲ—бҲәkбҲ»бҲ»
аЈҜаӯӯ бҲәkбҲ» = 	 ОҰ а¬ҝа¬ө бҲәвҲ’П• вҲ’ ЙҢбҲҳаӯұаӯіаӯ  Йүа·  аӯұаӯіаӯ  бҲ»   (45) 
ИҹU аӯӯ бҲәkбҲ»  (the first component of the optimal solution аЈҜаӯӯ бҲәkбҲ» ) is sent to the real process, and a 
new constrained QP problem is formed at the end of the next scan.   
4.3 Mill implementation results 
CD-MPC has been implemented in HoneywellвҖҷs quality control system (QCS) and widely 
deployed on different types of paper mills including fine paper, newsprint, liner board, and 
tissue, etc. In this chapter, a CD-MPC application for a fine paper machine will be used as an 
example to demonstrate the effectiveness of the CD-MPC controller.  
4.3.1 Paper machine configuration 
The paper machine discussed here is a fine paper machine, equipped with three CD actuator 
beams and two measurement scanner frames. The CD actuators include headbox slice lip (63 
zones), infrared dryer (40 zones), and induction heater (79 zones). The two scanner frames 
hold the paper quality gauges for dry weight, moisture, and caliper. Each measurement 
profile includes 250 measurement points with  the measurement interval equal to 25.4 mm 
(CD bin width). The production range of this machine is from 26 gsm (gram per square 
meter) to 85 gsm. The machine speed varies from 2650 feet per minute (13.5 meter/second) 
to 3100 feet per minute (15.7 meter/second). The scanning rates of the two scanners are 32 
and 34 seconds, respectively. In order to capture the nonlinearity of the process, three model 
groups are setup to represent the products of light weight paper, medium weight paper, 
and heavy weight paper, respectively. All three CD actuator be ams and three quality 
measurement profiles are included into the CD-MPC controller. In this section, the m edium 
weight scenario is used to illustrate the control performance of the CD-MPC controller.  
4.3.2 Multiple actuator beams and multiple quality measurements model 
Figure 21 shows the two-dimensional process models from the slice lip actuators (Autoslice) 
to the measurements of dry weight, moisture and caliper profiles. The system identifica tion 
algorithm discussed in Section 4.1.2 is used to derive these models. The plots on the left are 
the spatial responses, and the plots on the right are the dynamic responses. The purp le 
profiles are the average of the real process data, and the white profiles are the estimated 
profiles based on identified process model. It can be seen from comparison to the model for 
Autoslice to caliper that the models for Autosl ice to dry weight and to moisture have high 
model fit. In general, the bump test with a larger bump magnitude and longer bump 
duration will lead to a more accurate process model (better model fit). However, the open-
www.intechopen.com
Page 30:
 
Advanced Model Predictive Control 338 
loop bump tests degrade the quality of the fi nished product and excessive bump tests are 
always prevented. The criterion of the CD model identification is to provide a process model 
accurate enough for a CD-MPC controller.  
From the model identification results in Figu re 21, we can see the strong input-output 
coupling properties of papermaking CD processe s. The response width from slice lip to dry 
weight equals to 226.8mm. This is equivalent to 2.3 times the zone width of the slice lip CD 
actuator. Therefore, each individual zone of the slice lip affects not only its own spatial zone 
but also adjacent zones. As we discussed above, a CD-MPC process has two-fold process 
couplings: one is the coupling between differe nt actuator beams; and the other is the 
coupling between the different zones of the same  actuator beams. Considering these strong 
coupling characteristics, MPC strategy is a good candidate for CD control design.   
  
 
Fig. 21. The multiple CD actuator beams and quality measurement model display  
4.3.3 Control performance of the CD-MPC controller 
Table 3 summarizes the performance comparis on between the CD-MPC controller and the 
traditional single-input-single-output (SISO) CD controller (a Dahlin controller). Although 
traditional CD control is still quite common in paper mills, CD-MPC is becoming more and 
more popular. The significant performance im provement can be observed after switching 
CD control into multivariable CD-MPC.  
www.intechopen.com
Page 31:
 
Model Predictive Control and Optimization for Papermaking Processes 
339 
Paper Properties Traditional CD
Control НҙПғ
Multivariable CD-MPC 
Control НҙПғ Improvement (%) 
Dry Weight (gsm) 0.40 0.24 40% 
Moisture (%) 0.31 0.19 39% 
Caliper (mil) 0.032 0.025 22% 
Table 3. Traditional CD versus CD-MPC 
Figures 22вҖ“24 provide a visual performanc e comparison for the different quality 
measurements in both spatial do main and spatial frequency doma in. It can be seen that the 
peak-to-peak values (the proxy of 	НҙПғ
аӯҮаӯҲ  indexes) are smaller when using the CD-MPC 
controller. Also the controllable disturbances (the disturbances with the spatial frequency 
less than Xc) are effectively rejected by the CD-MPC controller. Here XНөdb  represents the 
spatial frequency where the spatial process power drops to 50% of the maximum spatial 
power over the full spatial frequency band, Xc represents the frequency where the spatial 
power drops to 4% of the maximum power, and Ні/НҙXa  represents the Nyquist frequency. 
 
 
Fig. 22. Performance comparison of dry weight profiles  
 
 
Fig. 23. Performance comparison of moisture profiles  
TC MPC 
www.intechopen.com
Page 32:
 
Advanced Model Predictive Control 340 
 
Fig. 24. Performance comparison of caliper profiles  
5. Conclusion and perspective 
We have seen that MPC has a number of a pplications in paper machine control. MPC 
performs basic MD control, and allows for enhanced MD-MPC control that incorporates 
economic optimization, and orchestrates transitions between paper grades. MPC can also be 
used for CD controls, using a carefully chosen solution technique to handle the large scale 
nature of the problem within the required time scale.  
While MD-MPC provides robust and responsive control, and also easily scales to demanding 
paper machine applications with larger numbers of CVвҖҷs and MVвҖҷs. The MD-MPC formulation 
may also be augmented with an economic objective function so that paper machine 
operational efficiency can be optimized (m aximum production, minimum energy costs, 
maximizing filler to fibre ratio etc.) while all quality variables continue to be regulated.  
In the future as new online sensors, such as the extensional stiffness sensor, gain acceptance 
additional quality variables can be adding to MD-MPC. In the case of extensional stiffness, 
this online strength measurement could allow economic optimization to minimize fibre use 
while maintaining paper strength.  
The papermaking CD process is a large scaled two-dimensional system. It shows strong 
input-output coupling properties. MPC is a standard technique in controlling multivariable 
systems, and has become a standard advanced control strategy in papermaking systems. 
However, there are several barriers for the acce ptance of CD-MPC by mill personnel: one is 
the novel multivariable control concept and the other is the non-trivial tuning technique. 
Commercial offline tools, such as IntelliMap,  facilitate the acceptance of CD-MPC by 
providing automatic model identification an d easy-to-use offline CD-MPC tuning. Such 
packages enable the CD-MPC users to review the predicted CD steady states before they 
update their CD control to CD-MPC (Fan et al. 2005). CD-MPC has been successfully 
deployed in over 70 paper mills and applied to practically all types of existing CD processes 
from fine paper, to board, to newsprints, to tissues, etc. Without doubt, CD-MPC will have a 
significant impact in papermaking CD control applications over the next decade. 
CD-MPC offers the significant capability to include multiple CD actuator arrays and 
multiple CD measurement arrays into one single CD controller. The next generation CD-
TC MPC 
www.intechopen.com
Page 33:
 
Model Predictive Control and Optimization for Papermaking Processes 
341 
MPC applications are most likely to include non-standard CD measurement, such as fibre 
orientation, gloss, web formation, and web porosity into the existing CD-MPC framework. 
A successful CD-MPC application for fibre orientation control has been reported in (Chu et 
al. 2010a). However there still exist technical ch allenges of controlling non-standard paper 
properties by using CD-MPC; fo r example, the derivation of accurate parametric models 
and the effectiveness of CD-MPC tuners for non-standard CD measurements.  
In the current CD-MPC framework, system identification and controller design are clearly  
separated. The efforts towards integrating syst em identification and controller design may 
bring significant benefits to CD control. Online CD model identification has drawn 
extensive attention in both academia and industries. A closed-loop CD alignment 
identification algorithm is pres ented in (Chu et al. 2010b). Closed  loop identification of the 
entire CD model remains an open problem.   
6. References 
BackstrГ¶m, J., & Baker, P. (2008). A Benefit Analysis of Model Predictive Machine 
Directional Control of Paper Machines, in  Proc Control Systems 2008, Vancouver, 
Canada, June 2008. 
BackstrГ¶m, J., Gheorghe, C., St ewart, G., & Vyse, R. (2001). Constrained model predictive 
control for cross directional multi-array processes. In Pulp & Paper Canada, May 
2001, pp. T128вҖ“ T102. 
BackstrГ¶m, J., Henderson, B., & Stewart G. ( 2002). Identification and Multivariable Control 
of Supercalenders, in Proc. Control Systems 2002, Stockholm, Sweden, pp 85-91. 
Bartlett, R., Biegler L., Backst rГ¶m, J., & Gopal, V. (2002). Quadratic programming algorithm 
for large-scale model predictive control, in Journal of Process Control, Vol. 12, pp. 
775 вҖ“ 795.  
Bemporad, A., & Morari, M. (2004). Robust model predictive control: A survey. In Proc. of 
European Control Conference, pp. 939вҖ“944, Porto, Portugal. 
Chen, C. (1999), Linear Systems Theory and Design. Oxford University Press, 3rd Edition.  
Chu, D. (2006). Explicit Robust Model Predicti ve Control and Its Applications. Ph.D. Thesis, 
University of Alberta, Canada.  
Chu, D., BackstrГ¶m J., Gheorghe C., Lahouaoula, A., & Chung, C. (2010a). Intelligent Closed 
Loop CD Alignment, in Proc Contro l System 2010, pp. 161-166, Stockholm, 
Sweden, 2010.   
Chu, D., Choi, J., BackstrГ¶m, J., & Baker, P.  (2008). Optimal Nonlinear Multivariable Grade 
Change in Closed-Loop Operations, in Proc Control Systems 2008, Vancouver, 
Canada, June 2008.  
Chu, D., Gheorghe C., BackstrГ¶m J., Nasl und, H., & Shakespeare, J. (2010b). Fiber 
Orientation Model and Control, pp.202 вҖ“ 207, in Proc Control System 2010, 
Stockholm, Sweden, 2010. 
Chu, S., MacHattie, R., & BackstrГ¶m, J.  (2010). Multivariable Control and Energy 
Optimization of Tissue Machines, In Proc. Control System 2010, Stockholm, 
Sweden, 2010. 
Duncan, S. (1989). The Cross-Directional Control of Web Forming Process. Ph.D. Thesis, 
University of London, UK.  
Fan, J. (2003). Model Predictive Control For Mu ltiple Cross-directional Processes : Analysis, 
Tuning, and Implementation, Ph.D. Thesis, University of British Columbia, 
Canada. 
www.intechopen.com
Page 34:
 
Advanced Model Predictive Control 342 
Fan, J., Stewart, G., Dumont G., BackstrГ¶m J., & He P. (2005) Approximate steady-state 
performance prediction of large-scale constrained model predictive control 
systems, in IEEE Trans on Control System Technology, Vol. 13, pp.884 вҖ“ 895. 
Fan, J., Stewart, G., & Dumont G. (2004)  Two-dimensional frequency analysis for 
unconstrained model predictive control of cross-directional processes, in 
Automatica, Vol. 40, pp. 1891 вҖ“ 1903.   
Froisy, J. (1994). Model predictive control: Past, present and future. In ISA Transactions, Vol. 
33, pp. 235вҖ“243. 
Garcia, C., Prett, D., & Morari, M. (1989). Model predictive control: Theory and practice - a 
survey. In Automatica, Vol. 25, pp. 335вҖ“348. 
Gavelin, G. (1998). Paper Machine Design an d Operation. Angus Wilde Publications, 
Vancouver, Canada 
Gheorghe, C., Lahouaoula, A, BackstrГ¶m J., & Baker P. (2009). Multivariable CD control of a 
large linerboard machine utilizing multiple multivariable MPC controllers, in Proc. 
PaperCon вҖҷ09 Conference, May, SL, USA. 
Gorinevsky, D., & Gheorghe C. (2003). Identificati on tool for cross-directional processes, in 
IEEE Trans on Control Systems Technology, Vol. 11, 2003 
Gorinevsky, D., & Heaven, M. (2001). Performa nce-optimized applied identification of 
separable distributed-parameter processes,вҖқ in IEEE Trans on Automatic Control, 
Vol. 46, pp. 1584 -1589 
Khalil H. (2001). Nonlinear Systems, Prentice Hall, 3rd Edition. 
Ljung, L. (1999). System Identifi cation Theory for the User (2nd  edition), Prentice Hall PTR, 
0-13-656695-2, USA. 
Lu, Z. (1996). Method of optimal scaling of variables in a multivariable controller utilizing 
range control, U.S. Patent 5,574,638. 
MacArthur, J.W. (1996). RMPCT : A New Approach To Multivariable Predictive Control For 
The Process Industries, in Proc Control Systems 1996, Halifax, Canada, April 1996. 
Morari, M., & Lee, J. (1999). Model predictive co ntrol: Past, present and future. In Computer 
and Chemical Engineering, Vol. 23, pp. 667вҖ“682. 
Persson, H. (1998). Dynamic mo delling and simulation of multicylinder paper dryers, 
Licentiate thesis, Lund Institute of Technology, Sweden. 
Qin, S., & Badgwell, T. (2000). An overview  of nonlinear model predictive control 
applications, in F. AllgГ¶wer and A. Zheng (eds), Nonlinear Predictive Control, 
BirkhГӨuser, pp. 369вҖ“393. 
Qin, S., & Badgwell, T. (2003). A Survey of in dustrial model prediction control technology, 
in Control Engineering Practice, Vol. 11, pp. 733вҖ“764. 
Rawlings, J. (1999). Tutorial: Mo del predictive control technolo gy. In Proc. of the American 
Control Conference, pp. 662 вҖ“676, San Diego, California. 
SlГӨtteke, O. (2006). Modelling and Control of  the Paper Machine Drying Section, Ph.D. 
thesis, Lund University, Sweden. 
Smook, G. (2002). Handbook for Pulp and Pa per Technologists (Third Edition), Angus 
Wilde Publications, Vancouver, Canada 
Wilhelmsson, B. (1995). An experimental and theoretical study of multi-cylinder paper 
drying, Lund Institute of Technology, Sweden. 
www.intechopen.com
Page 35:
Advanced Model Predictive Control
Edited by Dr. Tao ZHENG
ISBN 978-953-307-298-2
Hard cover, 418 pages
Publisher InTech
Published online 24, June, 2011
Published in print edition June, 2011
InTech Europe
University Campus STeP Ri 
Slavka Krautzeka 83/A 
51000 Rijeka, Croatia 
Phone: +385 (51) 770 447 
Fax: +385 (51) 686 166
www.intechopen.com
InTech China
Unit 405, Office Block, Hotel Equatorial Shanghai 
No.65, Yan An Road (West), Shanghai, 200040, China 
Phone: +86-21-62489820 
Fax: +86-21-62489821
Model Predictive Control (MPC) refers to a class of  control algorithms in which a dynamic process mode l is
used to predict and optimize process performance. F rom lower request of modeling accuracy and robustne ss
to complicated process plants, MPC has been widely accepted in many practical fields. As the guide for
researchers and engineers all over the world concer ned with the latest developments of MPC, the purpos e of
"Advanced Model Predictive Control" is to show the readers the recent achievements in this area. The f irst part
of this exciting book will help you comprehend the frontiers in theoretical research of MPC, such as F ast MPC,
Nonlinear MPC, Distributed MPC, Multi-Dimensional M PC and Fuzzy-Neural MPC. In the second part, severa l
excellent applications of MPC in modern industry ar e proposed and efficient commercial software for MP C is
introduced. Because of its special industrial origi n, we believe that MPC will remain energetic in the  future.
How to reference
In order to correctly reference this scholarly work , feel free to copy and paste the following:
Danlei Chu, Michael Forbes, Johan Backstrom, Cristi an Gheorghe and Stephen Chu (2011). Model Predictiv e
Control and Optimization for Papermaking Processes,  Advanced Model Predictive Control, Dr. Tao ZHENG
(Ed.), ISBN: 978-953-307-298-2, InTech, Available f rom: http://www.intechopen.com/books/advanced-model -
predictive-control/model-predictive-control-and-opt imization-for-papermaking-processes

Page 36:
В© 2011 The Author(s). Licensee IntechOpen. This chapter is distributed
under the terms of the 
Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-
ShareAlike-3.0 License
, which permits use, distribution and reproduction for
non-commercial purposes, provided the original is properly cited and
derivative works building on this content are distributed under the same
license.

==================================================
